Sir
Mr. V Ness has this evening reported to me Verbally that you refuse to answer my last letter,2 that you consider the course I have taken as intemperate and unnecessary and some other conversation which it is improper that I should notice.

My request to you was in the first instance proposed in a form the most simple in order that you might give to the affair that course to which you might be induced by your temper and your knowledge of facts. I relied with unsuspecting faith that from the frankness of a Soldier and the Candor of a gentleman I might expect an ingenuous declaration; that if, as I had reason to believe, you had used expressions derogatory to my honor, you would have had the Spirit to Maintain or the Magnanimity to retract them, and, that if from your language injurious inferences had been improperly drawn, Sincerity and delicacy would have pointed out to you the propriety of correcting errors which might thus have been widely diffused.

With these impressions, I was greatly disappointed in receiving from you a letter3 which I could only consider as evasive and which in manner, is not altogether decorus. In one expectation however, I was not wholly deceived, for at the close of your letter I find an intimation, that if I should dislike your refusal to acknowledge or deny the charge, you were ready to meet the consequences. This I deemed a sort of defiance, and I should have been justified if I had chosen to make it the basis of an immediate message: Yet, as you had also said something (though in my opinion unfounded) of the indefiniteness of my request; as I believed that your communication was the offspring, rather of false pride than of reflection, and, as I felt the utmost reluctance to proceed to extremities while any other hope remained, my request was repeated in terms more definite. To this you refuse all reply, reposing, as I am bound to presume on the tender of an alternative insinuated in your letter.

Thus, Sir, you have invited the course I am about to pursue, and now by your silence impose it upon me. If therefore your determinations are final, of which I am not permitted to doubt, Mr. Van Ness is authorised to communicate my further expectations either to yourself or to such friend as you may be pleased to indicate.

I have the honor to be   Your Ob st

"Sir,

"As you are a known and peculiar votary to the state of celibacy, I
judged it would do you no disservice to acquaint you of a late
occurrence, which sufficiently evidences, that after the most mature
consideration, some of our wisest and best men do prefer the
endearment of the nuptial bed.

"About eight days since, the Rev. Aaron Burr, president of the College
of New-Jersey, was married to a daughter of the renowned Mr. Jonathan
Edwards, late of Northampton. She is a young lady of about twenty-one.
Her person may be called agreeable; her natural genius seems to be
sprightly, and, no doubt, is greatly improved by a very virtuous
education. In short, she appears to be one every way qualified to make
a man of sense and piety happy in the conjugal relation. As to the
courtship or marriage, I shall not descend to particulars; but only
observe, in general, that, for some centuries, I suppose there has not
been one more in the patriarchal mode.

"I hope, sir, that this instance, both as to matter and form, will
have its genuine influence upon you, and as well bear a part in
convincing you that wedlock is incomparably preferable to the roving
uneasiness of the single state, as to direct you, when you are
choosing your mate, that, instead of acting the modern gallant, wisely
to imitate this example, and endeavour to restore courtship and
marriage to their original simplicity and design.

"My Dear Sir,

"I trust the purity of the motives by which I am actuated will find an
apology in your bosom for the liberty I assume in addressing you on a
subject which involves your eternal interest.

"Here, in the wilds of -----, I have found an extract of a letter,
written by your inestimable mother nearly sixty years ago, of which
you are the principal subject; and a transcript of which I shall
enclose for your perusal. Perhaps you will think me a weak,
presumptuous being; but permit me, dear sir, to assure you, this does
not proceed from a whim of the moment. It is not a mere transient gust
of enthusiasm. The subject has long been heavy on my mind. I have more
than once resolved to converse with you freely; to tell you how my own
feelings were affected relative to your situation; but my faltering
tongue refused to obey the impulse of my soul, and I have withdrawn
abruptly, to conceal that which I had not confidence to communicate.
But meeting (I believe providentially) with this precious relic has
determined me. I will write, and transmit it to you. I am too well
convinced of the liberality of your sentiments; but I still believe
you retain an inherent respect for the religion of your forefathers.

"I have often reflected on your trials, and the fortitude with which
you have sustained them, with astonishment. Yours has been no common
lot. But you seem to have forgotten the right use of adversity.
Afflictions from Heaven 'are angels sent on embassies of love.' We
must improve, and not abuse them, to obtain the blessing. They are
commissioned to stem the tide of impetuous passion; to check
inordinate ambition; to show us the insignificance of earthly
greatness; to wean our affections from transitory things, and elevate
them to those realities which are ever blooming at the right hand of
God. When affliction is thus sanctified, 'the heart at once it humbles
and exalts.'

"Was it philosophy that supported you in your trials? There is an hour
approaching when philosophy will fail, and all human science will
desert you. What then will be your substitute? Tell me, Colonel Burr,
or rather answer it to your own heart, when the pale messenger
appears, how will you meet him--'undamped by doubts, undarkened by
despair?'

"The enclosed is calculated to excite mingled sensations both of a
melancholy and pleasing nature. The hand that penned it is now among
'the just made perfect.' Your mother had given you up by faith. Have
you ever ratified the vows she made in your behalf? When she bade you
a long farewell, she commended you to the protection of Him who had
promised to be a father to the fatherless." The great Augustine, in
his early years, was an infidel in his principles, and a libertine in
his conduct, which his pious mother deplored with bitter weeping. But
she was told by her friends that 'the child of so many prayers, and
tears could not be lost;' and it was verified to her happy experience,
for he afterward became one of the grand luminaries of the church of
Christ. This remark has often been applied to you; and I trust you
will yet have the happiness to find that 'the prayers of the
righteous' have 'availed much.'

"One favour I would ask: when you have done with this, destroy it,
that it may never meet the eye of any third person. In the presence of
that God, before whom the inmost recesses of the heart are open, I
have written. I consulted him, and him only, respecting the propriety
of addressing it to you; and the answer he gave was, freedom in
writing, with a feeling of the deepest interest impressed upon my
heart.

"Z. Y"


Amid the variety of literary pieces which have in all ages been
ushered into the world, few, if any, afford greater satisfaction than
those that treat of man. To persons of a speculative nature and
elegant taste, whose bosoms glow with benevolence, such disquisitions
are peculiarly delightful. The reason, indeed, is obvious; for what
more necessary to be learned and accurately understood? what more near
and interesting? and, therefore, what more proper to engage the
attention? Well may I say, with our ethic poet,

    "'The proper study of mankind is man.'

"If we take a view of the body only, which may be called the shell or
external crust, we shall perceive it to be formed with amazing nicety
and art. How are we lost in wonder when we behold all its component
parts; when we behold them, although various and minute, and blended
together almost beyond conception, discharging their peculiar
functions without the least confusion. All harmoniously conspiring to
one grand end.

"But when we take a survey of the more sublime parts of the human
frame; when we behold man's internal make and structure; his mental
faculties; his social propensions, and those active powers which set
all in motion--the passions,--what an illustrious display of
consummate wisdom is presented to our admiring view! What brighter
mark--what stronger evidence need we of a God? The scanty limits of a
few minutes, to which I am confined, would not permit me, were I equal
to the task, to enter into a particular examination of all man's
internal powers. I shall therefore throw out a few thoughts on the
passions only.

"Man's mental powers, being in their nature sluggish and inactive,
cannot put themselves in motion. The grand design then of the passions
is, to rouse them to action. These lively and vigorous principles make
us eager in the pursuit of those things that are approved by the
judgment; keep the mind intent upon proper objects, and at once awake
to action all the powers of the soul. The passions give vivacity to
all our operations, and render the enjoyments of life pleasing and
agreeable. Without them, the scenes of the world would affect us no
more than the shadowy pictures of a morning dream.

"Who can view the works of nature, and the productions of art, without
the most sublime and rapturous emotions? Who can view the miseries of
others, without being dissolved into compassion? Who can read human
nature, as represented in the histories of the world, without burning
to chastise the perpetrators of tyranny, or glowing to imitate the
assertors of freedom? But, were we of a sudden stripped of our
passions, we should survey the works of nature and the productions of
art with indifference and neglect. We should be unaffected with the
calamities of others, deaf to the calls of pity, and dead to all the
feelings of humanity. Without generosity, benevolence, or charity, man
would be a groveling, despicable creature. Without the passions, man
would hardly rank above the beasts.

"It is a trite truth, that the passions have too much influence over
our sentiments and opinions. It is the remark of a late author, that
the actions and sentiments of men do as naturally follow the lead of
the passions, as the effect does the cause. Hence they are, by some,
aptly enough, termed the principles of action. Vicious desires will
produce vicious practices; and men, by permitting themselves to think
of indulging irregular passions, corrupt the understanding, which is
the source of all virtue and morality. The passions, then, if properly
regulated, are the gentle gales which keep life from stagnating; but,
if let loose, the tempests which tear every thing before them. Too
fatal observation will evince the truth of this.

"Do we not frequently behold men of the most sprightly genius, by
giving the reins to their passions, lost to society, and reduced to
the lowest ebb of misery and despair? Do we not frequently behold
persons of the most penetrating discernment and happy turn for polite
literature, by mingling with the sons of sensuality and riot, blasted
in the bloom of life? Such was the fate of the late celebrated Duke of
Wharton, Wilmot, earl of Rochester, and Villers, duke of Buckingham,
three noblemen, as eminently distinguished by their wit, taste, and
knowledge, as for their extravagance, revelry, and lawless passions.
In such cases, the most charming elocution, the finest fancy, the
brightest blaze of genius, and the noblest burst of thoughts, call for
louder vengeance, and damn them to lasting infamy and shame.

"A greater curse cannot, indeed, befall community, than for princes
and men in eminent departments to be under the influence of
ill-directed passions. Lo Alexander and Cesar, the fabled heroes of
antiquity, to what lengths did passion hurry them? Ambition, with look
sublime, bade them on, bade them grasp at universal dominion, and wade
to empire through seas of blood! But why need I confine myself to
these? Do not provinces, plundered and laid waste with fire and sword;
do not nations, massacred and slaughtered by the bloody hand of war;
do not all these dreadful and astonishing revolutions, recorded in the
pages of history, show the fatal effects of lawless passions?

"If the happiness of others could not, yet surely our own happiness
should induce us to keep our passions within the bounds of reason; for
the passions, when unduly elevated, destroy the health, impair the
mental faculties, sour the disposition, embitter life, and make us
equally disagreeable to others and uneasy to ourselves. Is it not,
then, of moment, that our passions be duly balanced, their sallies
confined within proper limits, and in no case suffered to transgress
the bounds of reason? Will any one deny the importance of regulating
the passions, when he considers how powerful they are, and that his
own happiness, and perhaps the happiness of thousands, depends upon
it? The regulation of the passions is a matter of moment, and
therefore we should be careful to fix them upon right objects, to
confine them within proper bounds, and never permit them to exceed the
limits assigned by nature. It is the part of reason to sooth the
passions, and to keep the soul in a pleasing serenity and calm: if
reason rules, all is quiet, composed, and benign: if reason rules, all
the passions, like a musical concert, are in unison. In short, our
passions, when moderate, are accompanied with a sense of fitness and
rectitude; but, when excessive, inflame the mind, and hurry us on to
action without due distinction of objects.

"Among uncivilized nations, the passions do, in general, exceed all
rational bounds. Need we a proof of this? Let us cast our eyes on the
different savage tribes in the world, and we shall be immediately
convinced that the passions rule without control. Happy it is, that in
polished society, the passions, by early discipline, are so moderated
as to be made subservient to the most important services. In this
respect, seminaries of learning are of the utmost advantage, and
attended with the most happy effects. Moreover, the passions are
attended with correspondent commotions in animal nature, and,
therefore, the real temper will, of course, be discovered by the
countenance, the gesture, and the voice. Here I might run into a
pleasing enumeration of many instances of this; but, fearing that I
have already trespassed upon your patience, shall desist. Permit me,
however unusual, to close with a wish. May none of those unruly
passions ever captivate any of my audience."

"It is altogether impossible to fix exactly the period when idolatry
took its rise. Adam, coming immediately from the hands of God, had
experienced too many manifestations of his power and goodness to be
unacquainted with him, and must have preserved the purest idea of him
in his own family, which, most probably, continued in the branch of
Seth till the deluge. The posterity of Cain, on the contrary (the pure
idea of God gradually wearing away, and by loose men being connected
with sense), fell into idolatry, and every other crime, which brought
on the deluge; a period about which Moses has said but little, and
from what he has said we can draw no just conclusion with respect to
the idolatry of those times.

"A certain author, being persuaded that idolatry did not take its rise
till after the deluge, gives a very singular account of its origin.
According to him, atheism had spread itself over the world. This
disposition of mind, says he, is the capital crime. Atheists are much
more odious to the Divinity than idolaters. Besides, this principle is
much more capable of leading men into that excessive corruption the
world fell into before the deluge. The knowledge of a God, of whatever
nature he is conceived, and the worship of a Deity, are apt, of
themselves, to be a restraint upon men. So that idolatry was of some
use to bear down the corruption of the world. It is therefore
probable, that the horrid vices men were fallen into before the
deluge, proceeded only from their not knowing nor serving a God. I am
even of opinion (continues he) that the idolatry and polytheism after
the deluge derived their origin from the atheism and impiety that
reigned before it. Such is the temper of men, when they have been
severely punished for any crime, they run into the opposite extreme. I
conjecture (concludes the same author) this was the case with men
after the deluge. As they reckoned that this terrible judgment, which
carried such indications of Divine wrath, was sent for the punishment
of atheism, they ran into the opposite extreme. They adored whatever
seemed to deserve their worship.

"It is true, indeed, that idolatry is capable of furnishing a curb
against irregularity of manners; but this author has conjectured,
without foundation, that atheism reigned universally before the
deluge. He ought, at least, to have excepted the posterity of Seth.

"However idolatry might have reigned before the deluge, it is certain
that the knowledge and worship of the true God were again united in
the family of Noah; and as long as the children and grandchildren of
that patriarch made but one family, in all probability, the worship of
the true God was little altered in its purity. Noah being at the head
of the people, and Shem, Ham, and Japheth witnesses of God's vengeance
on their contemporaries, is it probable that they, living in the midst
of their families, would suffer them to depart from the truth? We read
of nothing that can incline us to this belief. Various have been the
conjectures concerning the authors of idolatry. Some believe it was
Serug, the grandfather of Terah, who first introduced idolatry after
the deluge. Others maintain it was Nimrod, and that he instituted the
worship of fire among his subjects, which continues even to this day
in some places in Persia. Others assert that Ham was the author of it,
and then his son Canaan; and it is most probable that the unfortunate
sons of an accursed father were the first who, following the
propensity of their own heart, sought out sensible objects to which
they might offer a superstitious worship. As the two sons of Ham,
Canaan and Mizraim, settled, the one in Phoenicia, and the other in
Egypt, it is probable that these were the first nurseries of idolatry;
and the sun, being looked upon as the purest image of the Creator, was
the first object of it. It is not probable that men would choose
beings like themselves for the first objects of their adoration.
Nothing could be more capable of seducing than the beauty and
usefulness of the sun, dispensing light and fertility all around. But,
to conclude, we must not imagine that all idolatry sprang from the
same country. It came by slow degrees, and those who made the first
advances towards this impiety, did by no means carry it to that
extravagant height to which it afterwards arrived."



THE 

PRIVATE JOURNAL 

OF 

AARON BURR 



REPRINTED IN FULL FROM THE ORIGINAL 

MANUSCRIPT IN THE LIBRARY OF 

MR. WILLIAM K. BIXBT, 

OF ST. LOUIS, MO. 



WITH 

AN INTRODUCTION, EXPLANATORY NOTES, 
AND A GLOSSARY 



IN TWO VOLUMES 

VOL. II 



ROCHESTER, N. Y. 
1903 



COPYRIGHT 1903 

By WILLIAM K. BIXBY 

PUBLISHED 1905 



THE GENBSBE PRESS 

THE POST EXPRESS PRINTING CO. 

ROCHESTER. N. Y. 



PRIVATE JOURNAL 
OF A AR ON BURR 




ARIS, October i, 1810. Wrote note 
to Sisto, postponing his lesson (did I 
tell you that I had taken a Spanish 
master?) till to-morrow. At ^ p. 1 
to Fonzi's. T till i, doing a little. 
Home to smoke segar, &c., and then 
to Swediaur's to enquire about sale of Lettaspri's place 
for G. I was right. It is for sale. To Fonzi's again ; 
busy. Being engaged to dine with Vanderlyn at y 2 
p. 4, had an hour to spare, and I maliciously set out 
on mischief. Called on Edwards ; out. On Prevost ; 
out, and meeting no obstacles in the way, got safe to 
Vanderlyn's at ^ p. 3. Dined there, and at 6 came 
off together. Parted at the Pont des Arts 4 , he to go 
on some errand, I to come home ; but went round by 
Viol. J ; out. On the way, however, a renc. 4 ; 6 francs 
for pros. 5 only ; home at 8. Read two hours in my 
Sp. grammar. Made caf. blanc. Having no sug., 
took of that infernal strop de raisirf 3 ^ which with sour 
milk made a mess fit for the devil's feast, but swal- 
lowed it, and am still alive as you see at ^ p. 12. 
This morning called on Mancel to inquire about 
Crede. He made 100 apologies for going off without 

I So in the MS. 

a Literally, Bridge of the Arts. It crosses the Seine at the side of the Louvre. 

3 For Violette, one of Burr's many female acquaintances. 

4 For rencontre. 

5 The meaning of the phrase " pros, only," which Burr uses several times, is at least doubtful. 
Pros, may be an abbreviation for prospect, or prostitute, or prostitution, or for the French of the 
same. 

6 Grape syrup. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

me. Crede's coming is uncertain. Performed a 
capital operation last night which took me two hours 
to defaire 1 this morning. Was up at 6. Sisto came 
at 9 and staid his hour. I think that in one month 
I could read Spanish pretty well, with three or four 
hours' daily attention. But all this day I have not 
looked at Spanish since Sisto went off. At 1 1 to 
Mr. G.'s, and at 12 to Fonzi's. He asked me to dine 
there with Vanderlyn. Home at 2, and at 3 to St. 
Denis for seg. and soc* - At 4 to Fonzi's, expecting to 
do something before dinner ; but did nothing. T 
Madame de Launey, aunt of M. Bernardin St. Pierre, 
who amused me with anecdotes of St. Pierre 3 . He has 
two children, Paul et Virginie. The latter 16. Came 
off with Vanderlyn at 7. Strolled an hour. Called on 
Gaudoin to engage him to go to Fonzi's to work for 
me at 6 to-morrow morning. Home, and have been 
reading two hours in DePratz 4 to learn something for 
Crede. 

3. Sisto came at 9 and I took my lesson. At 1 1 
sor. to Mr. G.'s. A few minutes to Baron d'Alberg's ; 
out. To Valkenaer's ; out. To Fonzi's ; he was 
engaged. Passed an hour with Madame and Kern, 
and Madame asked me to dine, to which agreed in 

I For difaire. To undo. 

z Probably for segars and sucker (Swedish) or sucre (French), sugar. 

J Jacques Henri Bernardin de Saint Pierre (1757-1814) was a celebrated author. He 
studied for the church, was then a sailor, and then a soldier, but was dismissed from the army for 
insubordination. He went to St. Petersburg and was appointed a captain. In 1766 he fought 
against the Russians in Poland; later on, he fought against the Poles in Saxony. Returning to 
France he devoted himself to literature, and was associated with Rousseau. In 1784 his il Etudes 
de la Nature " (" Studies in Nature ") in five volumes gave him rank among the best prose 
writers in France. In 1788 he published "Paul et Virginie^ which became one of the most 
celebrated books of the age, and was translated into all European languages. 

4 Burr may refer to some work of Paidoux Duprat, a French juris-consult of the years 1510- 
1570, who wrote on ancient jurisprudence as well as on the civil and criminal practice of his time. 



Private "Journal of Aaron Burr . 

hopes of getting some work out of F. Home at 2. 
Bought one pound casson\ 3 francs 12 sous ; */ pound 
sugar, 52 sous; % pound tea, 3 livres; ^ pound from. 2 , 
9 sous ; total, 9 francs 13 sous. You see that I allow 
myself sugar ; but, Madame, I have dismissed my 
barber, which is a saving of at least 1 5 livres per month, 
and for some other discreet conduct this luxury is 
allowed. At ^ p. 4 to F.'s. T Madame de Launey 
and Hernandez. The beautiful Madame de C. came 
in, and I saw her home. Forgot to say that, coming 
from Valkenaer's this morning, I called and passed an 
hour with her. Home at 9, having drank tro*, and so 
not in good humor. To make it worse Jean't 4 came 
in most malapropos. They have the cursed Swedish 
custom here of not knocking. Lay on the bed, got 
asleep, and slept till 12. Lay two hours vigil 5 , and 
got up and made myself caf. blanc, and now, at 3 in the 
morning, am writing to hussy. Made a most shock- 
ing blunder by mispronouncing the word ebranler*. 

4. Slept till y 2 p. 8, and rose perfectly well, 
which was not expected after yesterday's dinner. At 
1 1 to Duke d'Alberg's, where y 2 hour. He had not 
seen the Minister, nor heard anything about me, but 
will see him this week. To Valkenaer's ; out. To 
Fonzi's, where two hours doing little, he much 



1 Lump sugar in masses. He may mean cassanade. Brown sugar. 

2 For frontage. Cheese. This is the first time Burr has used the French word for this 
article. Heretofore he has used either the Swedish word ott or made an attempt at the German 
word Kase. 

3 For trof. Too much. 

4 For Jeannette ? The name may be Jul. for Julie. The writing is not plain. 

5 Latin adjective. Awake. 

6 The French word ibranlir means to shake, to disturb. Burr may have pronounced it 
without the 1, in which case he would have approximated to the sound of ibrener, meaning to 
clean an infant ! 



Private y ourna I of Aaron Burr . 

engaged. Home, and ruminating on the blessings of 
life. At 3 set out to Vanderlyn's to dine. He had 
got a note, asking him and me to dine at Fonzi's on 
this, being St. Francis day. As the note had no date, 
I apprehended some mistake, and refused to go, but 
sent off Vanderlyn, and staid and dined with his maid. 
At 6 to Crede's ; not come. On my way home got 
entangled ; 7 francs 10 sous. Thus you see I save in 
sous and waste in crowns. Got home extremely 
grave and full of devout reflections and sage resolutions. 
At 9 came in Vanderlyn, and explained the affair of 
St. Francis. It is the fete 1 of the good Hernandez, 
and I regret not to have gone ; for besides a pleasant 
party I should have saved my 7 francs and 10 sous. 
The thing was not thought of till I had parted with 
Hernandez this morning. Drank the last of my caf. 
blanc this evening, so that the pound has lasted just 
three weeks. 

5. Sisto came at y z p. 9, and staid his hour. 
Paid him for his four lessons 12 francs, and told him 
I was going to the country. At 1 1 to Mr. G.'s, to 
make an appointment for him to meet me at i at my 
house on Crede's business. Thence to Valkenaer's, 
where an hour of very interesting conversation. To 
Fonzi's ; engaged. Home. Then to Quai de Vol- 
taire 1 , where bought three little books of Spanish 
dialogues, for I am resolved to read the language, and, 
besides, they will do for you and Gamillo'. Paid 6 



I For jour dt safete. His saint's day, his birthday. 

* Ordinarily called Quai Voltaire. It is on the left bank of the Seine opposite the Louvre. 
J So spelled in the MS. Of late Burr has been using the form Gampillo for Gampy, referring 
always to his grandson. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

francs 10 sous. To Fonzi's ; engaged. Home and 
dined with the family. 

6. Slept late this morning. Don't know why. 
At 1 1 to Fonzi's ; engaged. Home circuitously. On 
the route from this to F.'s I must be better known 
than any hack coachman. Home, and after smoking 
my segar and pondering an hour, to Rue Bourg del 
Abbaye 1 to buy a sample of Mollerat's vinaigre du 
bois*. Bought a bottle for 36 sous. Home. Out 
again to get one of G.'s bills changed. Got 1000- 
franc bill (about 39 guineas) changed, for which paid 
4 francs 10 sous. To shoemaker's, au Pal. Roy. 3 
Home and then to F.'s again ; engaged. Home, and 
at 4 made a dinner on boiled eggs. At 5 to Crede's. 
He is in town, but was not at home. Home slowly 
and still pondering. Ate a pound of grapes on my 
walk. Home at 7. To Fonzi's again ; he was still 
at the dinner-table. Got rendezvous for to-morrow. 

7. The mornings are so cold that I shudder at 
the thought of getting out of bed. It was 8 before I 
could persuade myself to get up. At 10 to Valken- 
aer's. He had company, and so did not go in, but 
saw his friend Blauw. To Fonzi's ; engaged. In- 
demnified myself with &c. To Mr. G.'s ; agreed to 
dine with him. To Fonzi's. Had a few minutes 
with him ; gave directions about one piece and got 
rendezvous for Tuesday. Home. Read an hour in 



1 For Rue Bourg-l'abbe. This is, at any rate, its modern name. 

2 Wood vinegar. 

} For au Palais Royal. To the Palais Royal. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

Cabanis 1 and at 5 to G.'s, whence to Frascata* to dine. 
After dinner we walked to the Theatre /r. J , but I 
refused to go in. Home. At 9 came in Vanderlyn, 
and made us a dish of tea, but from 7 to 9 I was other- 
wise amused. My affairs are quite stagnant, and I 
have no other prospect but that of starving in Paris. 
To-morrow I go with Mr. G. to see a place which he 
has thoughts of purchasing, seven leagues off. Shall 
not be back till Tuesday. Was this morning at Le 
Doux's to look at watches for self and Gamillo ! Self, 
I think, will not get one. 

9. A great many interruptions, particularly a 
note and messenger from Crede, kept me till ^ p. 9 
yesterday before I got to Mr. G.'s to breakfast. He 
had been waiting ^ of an hour for me, which, for an 
impatient valetudinarian, is a great deal, especially 
before breakfast. After breakfast I had to go for a 
memorandum to F.'s ; another y 2 hour's delay. 
Finally, at y z p. n, we set off. Passed through St. 

Denis 4 . At the latter stopped ^ hour to 

refresh the horse, and then on to , where we 

were told that there being no chausse* our gig (chaise) 

I Pierre Jean George Cabanis (1757-1808) was a celebrated French physician and philoso- 
pher. He was Mirabeau's medical adviser. The work in which Burr was interested was 
undoubtedly the one entitled " Raff arts du Physique et du Moral de /' Hommt" which appeared 
in 1802 in two volumes octavo. The title may be translated " Relations between the Physical 
System and Mental Faculties of Man." It was in this work that Cabanis maintained that " the 
brain secretes thought as the liver secretes bile." 

1 Under the Directory a Neapolitan coffee-house keeper started a place at the corner of Rue 
de Richelieu and the Boulevard to which the name Frascati was given. Soon the place became 
highly popular. A man named Perrin got control of it and turned it into a fashionable gambling 
house, to which both sexes resorted. It was open from 4 P. M. till i A. M. Balls and suppers 
were sometimes given there. Perrin retired after a number of years worth sixteen millions of 
francs, and his successors also made large fortunes there. Frascati enjoyed great popularity until 
1837, when it was closed forever. 

} For Theatre Francis. 

4 St. Denis is a city situated about two and a half miles north of the fortifications of Paris. 
Its principal curiosity is its abbey church or cathedral, the historical burial place of the kings of 
France. 

5 For chaussie. Highway. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

would not go. We therefore left the horse and chaise, 

and walked to Belle , about a league. Walked 

over the place and through the house. There are 
about twenty-five acres ; wood, meadow, garden, fish- 
pond. The house old, substantial, plain, but some- 
thing out of repair. Seven rooms on two floors, and 
some decent garret rooms. The outhouses spacious. 
The price, 60,000 francs ; about 12,000 dollars. It is 
the time of vintage, and along the road one could get 
grapes of the girls who were carrying them to the 
press ; but in the immediate neighborhood of Belle 

no vineyards. We walked back to our horse, 

and thence back two leagues to , where we 

dined (supped, being 8 o'clock), slept, and breakfasted. 
Our bill was 18 francs, horse included. The tavern 
neat and decent, "Hotel du Nord" 1 . On our return 
this morning stopped at St. Denis to see the Cathed- 
ral. All the interior, and all the monuments of kings, 
&c., were destroyed during the Revolution 1 . The 
church has been repaired, and within is handsome, in 
the Gothic stile*. The only good stile for churches. 
Home at 2 P. M. Found a note from Madame 
Robertson to dine there to-day ; very pressing, so 
resolved to go. First to Fonzi's an hour, but did 
nothing. Then to Mrs. Robertson's to dinner. T 
Jane E. and Madame M. Staid till near 9. My 
dinner at 8 last evening kept me awake almost all 
night. 

1 Literally Hotel (HStil) of the North. 

2 The royal tombs were greatly damaged at that time, but have since been restored. Many 
of them are of great interest and beauty. Why were the royal tombs destroyed f First, no 
doubt, because they were royal ; but the Convention considered that the nation had need of 
cannon and ammunition. The royal tombs would furnish lead and bronze. Hence their 
destruction was voted. 

3 So in the MS. ~ 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

10. Coucbe 12. Lev. at 8. You see I took a 
great sleep. Sor. at 10 to go to G.'s about certain law 
subjects. On the way a certain biped took me out of 
the way, kept me an hour and cost 8 francs. The 
only folly here which I do not regret. At y z p. 1 1 to 
G.'s ; out. To Fonzi's ; engaged ; but there met 
Vanderlyn, and engaged to dine with him to-day. 
Home, and read " Souvereignte "' ; a pamphlet which 
excites some attention. I cannot see why. Crede's 
son came in with a note and offer of rendezvous at ^ 
p. 5. At 4 to Fonzi's ; found him ; did a little, and 
got rendezvous for 9 to-morrow. Then slowly on to 
Crede's. No one at home. Took a walk, though 
fatigued, and called at ^ p. 5. No one at home. 
Waited ^ hour ; no one came. Off to Vanderlyn's ; 
he had dined. While I was eating in came Crede, 
and we walked together and had much confab. 
Then to Fonzi's, where Vanderlyn had engaged to 
meet me. It was ^ p. 8 when I got there, and 
every creature abed. Rang, but no answer. Home. 
I have been reading two hours in Cabanis. It is, I 
think, of all the books which I have bought for 
you, that which will afford you the most satisfaction. 
It is exactly in your line, being at once medical and 
philosophical ; and so good night. 

11. I went to bed at 1 2. At 7 came in Jul. 4 with 
my milk and bread ; but was so sleepy could not get 
up, and lay till 8, sleeping hard. At 10 to Fonzi's. 
Found him and Gaudoin at work for me. To G.'s, 



1 For " Souvtraineii." " Sovereignty." 

2 Julie. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

where an hour. It is the most analytic head of my 
acquaintance from America. To Fonzi's again, and 
there till 4. Took breakfast with him at i, a la four- 
chette. To Vanderlyn's ; out. Home at 6, and three 
eggs for dinner or supper, as you please. To Fonzi's 
again, where lay around and talked an hour. Home. 
Ju. 1 talks me to death ; but she is so good that I bear 
it with the patience of a jackass. We have had near a 
fortnight of pleasant weather, but the mornings cold. 
Yesterday set in rain ; it has rained all this day. 

12. Slept from 12 till waked by force at ^ p. 7. 
Just so I slept in England at this season two years 
ago. How was it in Sweden and Denmark last year? 
Please to look and tell me. At 10 to Mr. G.'s, and 
proposed a voyage South, to which he has half con- 
sented. To Fonzi's an hour. To Mancel's a few 

minutes. He had not seen Mons. , which was 

all my errand. To Due d'Alberg's. He had seen the 
Minister again. The same answer. My affair is with 
H. M. 2 , who has given no answer, and no mortal can 
conjecture why not, nor when it may be ; but I am 
assured that the delay is not from matoeillance*. To 
Fonzi's again for an hour and then home. At 5 to 
Fonzi's to dine. T Hernandez, Vanderlyn, and a 
sort of mad Spaniard. Off at 8 with Mar. 4 Drank 
too much wine. Four francs for a pros, and bran. 5 
and 2 for bianvol. 6 Home at 10. Called on G. on 



1 Julie. 

2 His Majesty, i. ., Napoleon. 

3 Malevolence. 

4 Probably for Marie. 

5 Possibly for brandy. 

6 Possibly for tienveillance. Benevolence. 



Private J ourn a I of Aaron Burr . 

the way ; all abroad. On my arrival at home found a 
long note from Mrs. Robertson ; among other things, 
asking me to call in the morning, at dinner, or in the 
evening of to-morrow, as I might choose. I shall 
reply, excusing myself from calling at all to-morrow. 
Not that I recollect having anything very special to 
engage me, but I won't. How one folly begets 
another, and so on like the holy bread in the New 
Testament. Having drank too much at F.'s, I com- 
mitted two follies before I got home. Then being 
disposed to drink more, sent out Jean't 1 at % p. 10 
for a bottle of wine of 20 sous, though the vin ordinaire' 1 
is 12 sous ; and now as comble de folie 1 am telling it all 
to you, huz. 4 

13. Something out of order in the morning. 
Sor. without breakfast. Mr. G.'s y 2 hour. He 
wavers about the expedition to Nuits 5 . On to Ma- 
dame Robertson's, where 2 hours. A headache came 
on. Took of oil of mint, rubbed the forehead with 
vinegar, to no effect. On my way home called on 
Roux; he is at Fontainebleau 6 . Home at 3. Very 
chilly, being thinly clad and the weather cold. Lay 
down without undressing ; covered warm, and got into 
a delicious sleep, when in comes Ju. and called several 
times to know if I was asleep. Replied yes, and sick. 

1 For Jeannette. 

2 Common, ordinary wine. 

J Literally, as height of folly. Hence, to complete my folly. 

4 For huzzy, which Burr uses for the modern word hussy. 

5 There are two towns of this name in France. One is situated in the department of Yonne, 
on the Yonne river, a tributary of the Seine. The other, to which Burr presumably refers, is in 
the department of Cote d'Or, about fourteen miles south-southwest of Dijon, <. ., far down 
toward Switzerland. This town is celebrated for the wines produced in the vicinity. 

6 Fontainebleau is a celebrated town situated thirty-seven miles south-southwest of Paris. 
The gardens there are fine, and the park and forests world-famous. This was the favorite resi- 
dence of the first Napoleon, and it was here that he abdicated in 1814. 

10 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

14. Ju., faithful to her system and seriously 
alarmed for my health, came in at daylight. I was so 
sound asleep that she was obliged to shake me before 
I woke. Opened my eyes, and lo! Ju. with a bowl of 
bouillon gras 1 in her hand. At 3 to Mr. G.'s ; out. 
To Fonzi's y 2 hour. To Crede's ; no one at home ; 
left a note. Home and then to Fonzi's again, where 
Vanderlyn and Hernandez ; sat an hour and walked 
y& hour with Vanderlyn and then home. Very cold 
and no fire. My chimney does not admit of fire. 
This evening read through "Vues Nouvelles sur les 
C our am d 'eau y la Navigation Inter ieur et la Marine"*, 
'par C. L. Duchrest 3 ; a Paris 4 : 1803. About 211 
pages, with table and plates, in which I find some good 
sense and science. 

15. Again Jul. came in at dawn, waked me, and 
presented a bowl of bouillon gras, smoking hot. I 
rose and swalloed 5 it ; after which, finding no appe- 
tite for breakfast, I was just going to seek Crede, 
when in he came, a few minutes before 9, which is 
early these cold mornings, the sun rising about 8. 
He sat y% hour. Merrihault is gone, and I have not 
seen him ! At y z p. 9 to Mr. G.'s, where took a 
breakfast of tea, &c. Thence to my shoemaker, au 
Pal. Roy 6 . Hunted about there for a thermometer, 
graduated Reaumur 7 and Fahrenheit. Found one for 



1 Literally fat broth a rich, meaty broth. 

2 The actual French title is " V ucs Nouvellts sur Us Courants d'cau, la Navigation Intirieurt 
tt Maritime." " New Views as to the Water Currents and Internal and Maritime Navigation." 

J The author's name was Charles Louis, Marquis Ducrest (1747-18x4). 

4 For Imfrimi a Paris. Printed at Paris. 

5 So in the MS. 

6 For au Palais Royal. (There were many stores and shops there. It is so to-day.) 

7 For Reaumur. 

II 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

5 francs, but rather too large. On to Pont Neuf on 
same errand, but did not succeed. F.'s to lounge an 
hour. Thence to a German watchmaker's, with whom 
I have made acquaintance ; but for what, won't tell 
now. Home to dress for dinner. Mr. Adelle had a 
snug little fire, by which took a warming. Ate a 
pound of grapes, and at ^ p. 4 set out for Mrs. 
Robertson's to dine. At dinner, several, among them 
Mr. Heath, an English lawyer, who has lately come 
here from London, having a passport from this gov- 
ernment to come and return. A very pleasant, well- 
informed young man. After dinner came in Mallet, 
the banker. He is certainly nearly related to your 
Mallet 1 , but disavows it, and denies all knowledge of 
him, though living many years in the same city, and 
in the same line of business ; doubtless they knew 
each other well ; perhaps too well. Home at 9, and 
sat an hour with the family by Adelle's fire. That 
name reminds me of your good and amiable friend, 

. She is married to a man of letters and 

accomplishments, and settled in an easy but modest 
style at Versailles. I do not learn that either of her 
daughters is married. M. has become enormously 
fat, as said by Mrs. R. Have spent an hour in roast- 
ing coffee a la blanf, and have paid myself by a large 
bowl, bien sucre*. Called this morning on Captain 
Skiddy, but he was out. 

1 6. Did not go to bed till 2. Got asleep pres- 

I The reference is to John Lewis Mallet, a relative of Mrs. Burr, whom Burr met on his first 
visit to London. 



2 He means cafe blanc. 

J Well sugared or sweetened. 



12 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

ently. Waked again. Lay awake till 6, and then 
slept till 9. At i Mr. G.'s ; out. Walked an hour 
without any object. Dinner with the family. In the 
evening to Fonzi's, where met la belle De Cas. 1 
Walked an hour with her on the Boulevard, and then 
home. Made myself caf. blanf^ and now, at ^ p. 12, 
am thinking of going to bed. Have been reading 
this evening le Comte de Gorani on " Government," 
&c., translated into Fremch from the Italian. A lib- 
eral-minded man, and of some acquirements, but not 
profound. Something sombre, Mr. Gamp. 

17. Lay till 9, though Ju. made me a fire of 
her own good feeling and with her own money. She 
said it was too cold and that I was not well, &c. At 
1 1 to G.'s, where an hour. Talked with him about a 
speculation in the Holland Company lands'. It is 
the best head in the world for such things and for 
many others. Thence on the same subject to Valke- 
naer's, where half an hour, and then interrupted by a 
lady. It is always so (unless when I go very early). 
He is one of the Holland Company, and, therefore, 

i The beautiful De Cas. Possibly for de Castro. 

* For cafi ilanc. 

J On May II, 1791, Robert Morris purchased from Massachusetts the pre-emptive right to 
the Indian lands in Western New York. The lands lay between the Genesee river and the 
western boundary of the state, embracing the present counties of Niagara, Erie, Chautauqua, 
and Cattaraugus, and portions of the counties of Orleans, Genesee, Wyoming, and Allegany, 
about four million acres in all. In 1792 and 179?, Morris sold this land, except a strip along the 
eastern boundary, to certain capitalists in Holland, agreeing to extinguish the Indian title. This 
he did by a treaty concluded on September 15, 1797, at Big Tree, now Geneseo, N. Y. Soon 
thereafter the Hollanders appointed agents to manage the property and open it up to settlement. 
The first deed to a settler on the lands was executed to John Young, in 1804. The Holland 
capitalists who took deeds from Morris were Wilhelm Willink, Nicholas Van Staphorst, Pieter 
Van Eeghlen, Hendrick Vollenhoven, and Rutger Schemmelpenninck, but there were many 
capitalists, both in Europe and America, who were interested with them to a greater or less 
extent. Burr himself was one of these. In December, 1795, or 1796, he entered into a cove- 
nant with the Holland Land Company for the purchase of 100,000 acres of land at iz shillings 
per acre, payable in installments. The speculation did not result advantageously to Burr. The 
land increased rapidly in value, but he was unable to make his payments and in 1799, at some 
sacrifice to himself, the venture was settled and he was released from further obligations. The 
affairs of the Holland Land Company were not finally wound up till 1837. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

I could not have addressed myself to a better source 
for information. Thence on the same subject to 
Swan at St. Pelasgie, which you recollect is about one 
and a half leagues from this. Dined with him and 
drank vin de Roussillon 1 for the first time. Took the 
address, and on my way home bought half a dozen 
bottles at 36 sous per bottle; a great extravagance. 
But recollect, Madame, that it is several weeks since I 
have bought a single bottle of wine, so that you won't 
grudge me this luxury. On coming out from the St. 
Pelasgie it rained very hard. I had no paraplu? 3 and 
was resolved not to take coach if one had offered. 
Got home wet to the skin, from head to foot. Jul. 
made me a good fire, for my chimney was reformed a 
little. Changed clothes. Caf. blanc, and am quite 
refreshed. 

1 8. Coucbe i. Rose 7. At y z p. 8 to Mr. 
G.'s, where took breakfast, and talked over the Hol- 
land Company affair. To Valkenaer's on the same 
subject. He enters with zeal into my views. At 12 
to Due d'Alberg's; out. On to Mrs. Robertson's. 
She was with her mantuamaker, in deep consultation 
over half a dozen new and very rich robes. I was 
taken into council, which lasted an hour. Mons. 
Adamson came in and I came out. Suspect she is 
going to marry him, though she denies it stoutly. 
Home by Dr. Swediaur's, where y z hour. Sor. at 3 
to the horologer 3 ; out. Alorst to commit some folly ; 

I Roussillon wine. 

^ For farafluit. Umbrella. 

J Watchmaker. 

4 Then. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

cost 5 francs ; on two pros. 1 and money wasted. 
Home at 6. Having refused to dine with the fam., I 
took three eggs. Ju. has kept me two hours writing 
letter of business ; so two hours last night. Yester- 
day had note from Captain Skiddy, offering to take 
charge of my letters to the United States, of which 
shall profit. He has gone to Bourdeaux, so that I 
fear that I cannot charge him with parcels for you ; 
i. e. y books. 

19. Couche 12 and slept most profoundly till 8, 
which was very ill, for I ought to have been at Due 
d' Alberg's at 9. Seeing this to be out of the question 
(for it takes me nearly two hours to get my breakfast, 
shave, and dress), I went on leisurely, and at n, when 
Mr. G. came in, I had not breakfasted. Mr. G. made 
me a most liberal proposition on the subject of the 
Holland Company affair ; so very liberal that if I had 
now a passport to go to Amsterdam, I would clear 
for myself 10,000 dollars in a fortnight. Got my 
breakfast and off to Due d' Alberg's, to consult about 
my passport ; out. Took a walk round by Paschaud's, 
to get news of Madame Paschaud. Then to Fonzi's. 
Then to Valkenaer's to inquire further about Holland 
Company affairs ; out. Home for an hour. To 
Hahn's, horologer. To Due d' Alberg's at 4 ; saw 
him a few minutes ; was more froid 1 than usual ; 
thinks he can do nothing, and doubts my getting a 
passport for Amsterdam unless I first get one from 
the American consul here. The American consul is 



I It is not at all certain whether Burr is using the English or the French word. See Glossary. 
a Cold, distant. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

that McRae, the lawyer of Richmond, of whom you 
have heard, and perhaps saw ! Quelle perspective* ! 
Home, and dined en fam* with Madame Pel. and 
Adelle. Treated ourselves to a bottle of my Roussil- 
lon. In the evening to Fonzi's, where staid till ^ p. 9. 
20. Another profound sleep of eight hours, 
which is the most extraordinary, as I lay down full of 
my Holland Company project. Made out to dress 
and breakfast (shaving omitted) in one hour. To Mr. 
G.'s. He continues to have faith in Holland Com- 
pany affairs, and is always replete with good ideas. 
To Fonzi's for a few minutes, and then to Valkenaer's, 
Rue St. George, No. 6. Staid there two hours. He 
had taken a good deal of trouble to acquire informa- 
tion for me, and manifests a desire to promote my 
views. At my request, he wrote replies, in the form 
of a letter, to my inquiries. Home and wrote a note 
to G. to give me rendezvous to-day, and left the note 
at his lodgings. To the horologer. To the cordon- 
niers 1 . Home. A note from G. that he would be at 
home till 4. Called on him at 4, and had ^ hour's 
talk. Some obstacles, or rather doubts, arise, of which 
we made notes. To Valkenaer's to dine enfam., that 
we might talk of Holland Company. Just as we sat 
down came in M'lle H., a very lovely woman, who, 
after much pressing, joined us at dinner. We were 4, 
and the dinner was very gay, but nothing more could 
be said of Holland Company. Am to see G. at 9 



I What a prospect ! 

^ For en famille. 

J To the shoemaker's. 



16 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

to-morrow morning. Left Valkenaer at 7, and to 
Fonzi's, where met Vanderlyn, and the beautiful 
Madame de C., with her husband, who has returned 
after an absence of four or five months. Le Baron 
Ramignani came in, and I came off with Vanderlyn 
home. Vanderlyn made himself tea, of which I did 
not partake, having resolved that either tea or caf. 
blanc is a mere luxury in the evening ; is expensive ; 
at least, unnecessary ; ergo\ pernicious. 

21. Coucbe at n, intending to rise very early. 
Slept not a wink till 5 ; ergo, lay awake till that hour, 
from what cause I cannot imagine, for I had dined tem- 
perately, and drank neither tea nor coffee. Perhaps 
from the excessive sleeping of the two preceding 
nights. When Ju. came in it looked dark and rained 
hard. She said it was 7 o'clock. Being engaged to 
breakfast with G. at 9, got up and dressed leisurely. 
Then to Fonzi's, where an hour doing nothing, 
Gaudoin having disappointed us. Discovered that I 
had forgotten to moter 1 your watch. Instead of 9, as 
I supposed, it was 10. Hastened to G.'s who had 
been waiting an hour for me. After breakfast and 
talking of Holland Company, to Fonzi's again, and 
there till i ; then home to smoke segar, &c. Then 
to St. Pelasgie to see Swan about the means of getting 
a passport from McRae. There also met S. P. 
Broome. Then to Vanderlyn's, where had agreed to 
dine. There were Mr. and Madame Hernandez and 
a Swedish painter or sculptor. Mr. Fonzi brought a 

1 Latin. Therefore. 

2 For monttr. To wind up. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

turkey, wine, &c., and we had a feast. Off at 8 and 
home. Have taken a good dose of cafe bl. 1 and shall 
couche exactly at 12. I can never sleep sooner. 
Have ordered Ju. to wake me at 6, having much on 
hand in the morning. Inconsiderately engaged to dine 
with Swan on Wednesday, having engaged for that 
day with Mr. G. at Frascati*, there to meet Baron Fox 
or Faucks, who was in the United States during the 
American war, and has settled in England. Raining 
all day. 

22. Another night of insomnia, from what cause 
is not even suspected. Went to bed at 12. Lay, 
vainly trying to sleep, till 2. Got up, smoked segars, 
drank of my Roussillon wine, and again to bed. Lay 
awake till 4, and rose at 6. So that for these last forty- 
eight hours have slept about four. Feel no inconve- 
nience, nor now, at n, the least inclined to sleep. At 
8 to Fonzi's, by his appointment; abed. Home for 
an hour, and again to Fonzi's, where an hour. Then 
to Valkenaer's, where till 1 2 ; always amused. Talked 
much of Holland Company and other matters. 
M'lle, who dined with us on Saturday, came in, and 
then I came off. To Fonzi's again an hour. Home. 
To the horologer and again to Fonzi's one hour. 
Home. Three eggs for dinner. At 5 sor. On the 
way bought a book for 10 sous. At Vanderlyn's 
wrote note to Crede, and then home. On the way 
spent 5 francs not much to my satisfaction. Shall 
take no caf. bl} nor anything else to-night. This 



I For cafe blane. 

x See page 6, note z. 

3 For cafe blanc. 



18 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

morning, too, called on G. and passed an hour. He 
continues in the same disposition to support me in the 
Holland Company affairs ; but, alas ! if I should not 
be able to get passport, all is lost. 

23. Slept profoundly till 8. Ju. came in, made 
a fire, &c., without my knowledge, so hard did I sleep. 
At ii to Valkenaer's about Holland Company affairs. 
After y z hour we were interrupted by a lady. To 
the horologer's. To the cordon r l ; not done. There 
is much less punctuality with mechanics here than 
even with us. Home and then to Swediaur's. He 
read me a curious anecdote of a monk at Alexandria 
(nomme z Heron) in the fifth century, from a book 
written by Moursins at the time. The monk forget- 
ting his oath, &c., attached himself to an opera dancer 
and got a ven. 3 disease which carried off all his genitals 
and then, the writer adds, he reformed and led a godly, 

quiet life. Took a long tour, though very dirty 

walking, to see fabric -am of cadres of montres 4 . Home 
at 4. G. came in soon after, rather out of spirits, by 
reason of a decree confiscating all colonial property in 
Spain, which may affect him in about 50,000 dollars 
by affecting his debtors there. I greatly fear it will 
indispose him for the Holland Company affair. He 
took me to dine with him au Conchal, famous for 
excellence in every sort of fish. We had first soal or 
sole, which had been kept at least eight days. I would 
not eat a mouthful of it. Then turbot, which G. 

I For ardonnier. Shoemaker. 

Named, or the name of, Heron. 

J For venereal. 

4 For fabricantt dt cadrant d montrt. Manufacture of watch dials. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

found still more stale. We had the good fortune to 
procure some potatoes, simply boiled. Our dessert 
was a Charlotte, which in English means an apple 
pye"; the which pye is composed of two apples, with 
a very little molasses of raisins and a crust of dough, 
which when baked brown was as hard as marble. For 
this dinner he paid 12 francs 15 sous, which at the 
present exchange, is about 3 dollars. We had one 
bottle of wine at 50 sous. He came home with me. 
We had a fire, and drank a glass of Roussillon, and 
went off at 8. Then came in Vanderlyn and sat an 
hour. Roussillon again. 

24. Coucbe at 12 and slept very sound till 8. 
As Ju. had not come in to make my fire, turned over 
and dozed another hour, and then mustered courage to 
get up. Discovered that I had locked my door. Ju. 
had made many attempts, but finding the door locked, 
supposed I wished to be quiet. Got my breakfast 
very leisurely about n, and wasted time till near 2, 
but supposed to be only i. Set out for Due 
d'Alberg's ; but on the way, discovering the true time, 
hastened on to St. Pelasgie, where I had engaged to 
dine. One cannot enter there after 3. Finding that 
I should be too late, walk as fast as I would, took 
cabriole (20 sous), and arrived one minute before 3. 
Passed y 2 hour with that strange creature, S. P. 
Broome ; then dined with Swan. The object of my 
visit wholly failed. He had not seen McCrae 2 , nor 



1 So in the MS. 

2 Burr spells this name in various ways, but usually McRae. 



20 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

heard from V. Called on Vanderlyn on my way 
home; out. Rene. 1 and 6 francs. Assez bier?; 
another, 2 francs. Got home at ^ p. 7. Have eaten 
about a pound of grapes and drank a glass of Roussil- 
lon. This morning bought pair gloves for une jo. 
b/an'se*, 3 francs, and a ring, 6 francs, for, I don't 
know whom. Voila> iS francs pour rien 4 . Indeed, I 
won't do so again. 

25. Couche 12 and slept none till 4. This 
comes from lounging an hour in bed yesterday. At 
10 to Fonzi's. Thence to Mr. G.'s where an hour. 
He is not in good health, which affects his spirits, and 
may discourage him from the Holland Company 
enterprise. This immense object will, I fear, be lost 
by delays which I can in no way avoid. Set out to go 
to Mrs. Robertson's, but turned off and went to 
Vanderlyn's, to see if Crede had come to town. Not 
come, nor anything heard of him. Everything com- 
bines to retard. Home and took three eggs for 
dinner, and about */ bottle Roussillon. Then to the 
horologer's. Home for two hours, and then to meet 
Vanderlyn. Nothing of Crede. Home, and have 
been reading newspapers, and the speeches of the 
crown orators on the code criminel/e*. Very chilly, 
uncomfortable, wet. Keep a small fire, but only when 
at home. 

26. Couche at 12 and slept sound till 8. One 
undisturbed nap. Took things leisurely, and did not 

I For rencontre. 

i Quite good, or good enough. 

J For une jolie klanchiueust. A pretty laundress. 

4 Behold, or there go 18 francs for nothing. 

5 For Code Criminel. The Criminal Code. 

21 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

get out till ii. Called on Mr. G.; out. To Fonzi's 
y^, hour. To horologer's. To Madame G. She 
looks very well, and sais 1 she has dismissed her lover, 
which is a good thing, but a most outrageous piece of 
coquetry. Home for an hour. Then to Fonzi's and 
then to Vanderlyn's, where I had engaged to dine. 
After dinner came straight home and got here safe. 
Have been burning and grinding my caf. blanc. No 
one else can burn it. The Holland Company affair 
has not advanced a whit to-day. Forgot to tell you 
that yesterday I wrote to Russell (that Jonathan 
Russell, of Rhode Island, whom you have often seen 
at my house, and whom Armstrong has left charge des 
affaires 7 '}^ demanding a certificate of my citizenship. 
He replied in a very dry note that the business of 
passport and certificates was with the consul, to whom 
I might apply. This I knew before, and only wrote 
the note to see how he would behave. The consul, 
you know, is McRae of Richmond 3 . It is now i 
o'clock at night ; that is, philosophically speaking, 
Saturday morning. I was near going to bed without 
writing to you, for it is very cold, and I have only two 
little stumps, about as big as your little fists. But, 
then, I thought you would so pout ; so I mustered 
courage, and have wrote 4 all this, hussy. 

1 So in the MS. 

2 For thargi d' affaires. 

3 The correspondence, under date of Paris, October 25, 1810, was as follows : 

BURR TO RUSSELL : " Mr. Burr presents respectful compliments. As a citizen of the United 
States, he requests of Mr. Russell an official certificate to that effect, and will have the honour of 
calling for the purpose at an hour which he may be pleased to name. The fact of Mr. Burr's 
citizenship being sufficiently known to Mr. Russell, it is presumed that other proof will be 
deemed unnecessary." 

RUSSELL TO BURR : " In reply to Mr. Burr's note of this morning, Mr. Russell begs leave 
to inform him that the province of granting passports to citizens of the United States belongs to 
the consul, to whom all wishing for that protection must apply." 

4 So in the MS. 

22 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

27. Couche at 12. Slept boy-like till 7 and 
then rose without fire, dressed, and off to Vanderlyn's 
to breakfast. Got to Vanderlyn's before 9. He was 
up. Sent to enquire about Crede. Nothing yet 
heard of him. Rather a pleasant day, but cold. This 
month is like our November at New York, only 
sombre, and almost daily raining. After breakfast, 
home, and then to Mr. G.'s, where met a Mr. 
Cushion 1 , of Boston, a stout, handsome man of about 
40. Will tell you a story of him to make laugh. 
Thence to Fonzi's. Thence away to Rue du Bac to 
a circulating library, but did not engage. Paid 15 
sous for a catalogue. Thence to Place St. Andre, to 
my mard de vin Roussillon 2 . Took three bottles of 
the same, 36 sous, and six of an inferior quality at 25 
sous per bottle. Home. Dined with the fam.*, and 
treated them with my last bot. of Roussillon, this day's 
purchase not having come in. Soon after dinner 
came in Vanderlyn. Had nothing to give him to 
drink, and borrowed a bottle of vin ordin.* of Jul. 
Vanderlyn sat till ^ p. 9. Read two plays which I 
bought to-day at 8 sous each ; one "Les Fables d y 
Esopes "*, extremely dull and full of absurdities. The 
other something better. This morning my horologer, 
Hahn, a German, called. Received a note from Swan, 
not very satisfactory, about his sale of lands for wine. 

28. Couche i, and a single nap till 7. I sleep so 



1 Gushing ! 

2 Mar'd for marchand. My Roussillon wine-merchant. 
J For family, or for French famillt. 

4 For vin ordinaire. Ordinary wine. 

5 Aesop's Fables. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

sound that I do not dream or move. Off again to 
Vanderlyn's to breakfast, and inquire about Crede. 
Vanderlyn was just getting up (9 o'clock) ; has become 
a little lazy. He promised me a copy of your picture, 
which has been in his hands for the purpose now five 
months. For the last four he has not touched it. 
Crede junior came in while we were at breakfast. The 
father not come nor heard of. Resolved to go to St. 
Germain, but changed my mind and wrote him a letter. 
Home at ii. Took a long tour to hunt Rochefau- 
cauld's " Travels ", which I have often seen exposed 
on the quais at 10 sous a volume, but could not find 
it. Bought you six plays at 6 sous each. I buy only 
comedies and prose. Home at 4. Ju. waked me 
this morning at */ p. 7 with a hot bouillon gras in her 
hand, to which I submitted without remonstrance ; 
but I cheated her, for I hid it in my cabinet, and at 4 
took it for dinner and found it excellent ; but she 
happened to come in while I was eating it, and 
detected me. She is urging me very much to go and 
see her friend, a respectable, aged, and learned priest. 
She says he can be useful to me, and has prepared him 
to receive me. Have promised Ju. that I will go 
to-morrow. Read two of your plays, both tolerable. 
"Le Statue "' in one act, and "Les Egoists "* in four. 
In the latter the character of the count is a true por- 
trait of a father and a son of the time present. Cold, 
and Gamp has no fire in this room, and very little in 
t'other. 



I For " La Statue." " The Statue." 
a For " Les Egeiitei." " The Egotists." 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

29. Slept from 12 to ^ p. 7, and then it took 
Ju. y<t, hour to wake me. In the name of God, am I 
to be henceforth such a Sybarite 1 ? I live very temper- 
ately and take only moderate exercise, and have no 
fatigue of mind, except when I think of your being in 
those vile swamps. Ma jo. pe. blanse.' 2 ' came in before 
I was up. Wrote Mr. McRae, asking certificate of 
citizenship. Requested by the messenger verbally that 
he would send an answer. I expect some vulgar 
impertinence, coupled with a refusal. Have I told 
you that Due d'A. says if I can get a certificate from 
the American consul, I shall have no further difficulty 
about a passport ? Hence my application to Russell 
and to McRae. If the latter answers insolently, the 
only revenge I will take, for revenge, you know, is 
not in my nature, will be to publish his letter'. At 
ii to Abbe Rolins, I 'ami de Ju. 4 He is a soixantdix- 
genaire et alit'e s . Sits up in his bed. A very benign, 
cheerful, intelligent man. Received me with that air 
of kindness which seems his nature. Proposed to 
introduce me to an American who would put me in 

1 Sybaris was a Greek city which was noted for its luxury. Hence a Sybarite is a luxurious 
person. 

2 For ma Julie fetite blanchisieuit. My pretty little laundress. 

J The correspondence was as follows, under date of Paris, October zg, 1810 : 

BURR TO McRAE : " Mr. Burr presents compliments. Having addressed himself to Mr. 
Russell for a certificate of citizenship, has been informed by him that the business of granting 
certificates was transferred to the consul. He therefore repeats the request to Mr. McRae. If 
a personal attendance be deemed necessary, Mr. Burr will wait on Mr. McRae for the purpose at 
any hour he may be pleased to appoint." 

McRAK TO BURR: "Mr. McRae answers to Mr. Burr's note of this morning, that his 
knowledge of the circumstances under which Mr. Burr left the United States renders it his duty 
to decline giving Mr. Burr either a passport or a fermis de sijour*. If, however, the opinion 
Mr. McRae has formed and the determination he has adopted on this subject be erroneous, there 
is a remedy at hand. Although the business of granting passports and fermis de sijour generally 
is confined to the consul, the charge des affaires unquestionably possesses full authority to grant 
protection in either of those forms to any person to whom it may be improperly denied by the 
consul." 

* Permission to stay in a place. 

4 The friend of Julie. 

J A septuagenarian and bedridden. 

25 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

the way to get on, and to a clerk in the department of 
foreign affairs. He has not the remotest idea who I 
am, for Ju. did not mention my name, (indeed, she 
cannot pronounce it intelligibly), only that I was a 
stranger, unfortunate, and wanting a passport. The 
Abbe asked me if I was from Germany. I am more 
often taken for a German than for English or Ameri- 
can. I did not mention my name, but seeing that he 
had many persons in waiting proposed to call at a 
moment of less occupation. He named Thursday 
next at 1 1 A. M. I shall certainly call at the hour, 
if it be only to see him again, and to suffer him to 
believe that he has been useful to me. Poor Ju. 
almost shed tears of joy when I related how kindly 
the Abbe had received me. At i, on my way to Mr. 
G.'s, met him in the street coming to see me. Went 
to his quarters and sat an hour. He is still firm in 
the Holland Company affair. Thence to Swediaur's, 
where *4 hour. Read there the imperial decree for 
seizing and burning all British goods, &c. Home. 
Madame P. asked me to dine ; refused. Took bis. 
and cas. 1 in my room. My 25 sous wine is detestable, 
and has no sort of resemblance to the vrai* Roussillon 
at 36 sous. Indeed, my dear little T. } , you must not 
scold so damd 4 hard if I take pretty nearly a bottle a 
day of the vrai Roussillon. By way of compensation, 
will drink neither tea nor coffee in the evening, never 
dine at resfrsf and eke out a pound cassonade 6 a fort- 

I For biscuit and cjisonadc, brown sugar; or cas. for Kate, German for cheese. 

l True, or genuine, Roussillon. 

} Theodosia. 

4 So in the MS. 

5 For at a restaurateur* s. At a restaurant keeper's. 

6 Brown sugar. 

26 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

night; and when I have no more money I will drink 
water. To Fonzi's at 4. Asked me to dine ; refused. 
To shoemaker's ; a pair at length done, but don't suit. 
Oh ! I have a terrible story to tell you about my 
bonne tier 1 , Mr. Abel. Goody grashees*, it would have 
kept me in Roussillon for six weeks at a bottle a day ! 
But you must wait a little. It would disturb my 
slumbers to tell it to-night. Took two eggs for my 
supper. Have removed my writing-table from my 
cabinet to my bedroom, where have a leetle 1 fire, else 
you would not have had half so much journal. 

30. My slumbers were sufficiently disturbed by 
those two eggs. Rose at 8. At 10 to Fonzi's. To 
Mancel's to return his vinagre* pamphlet ; he was out. 
To Volney's. Found his house full of carpenters and 
masons ; and, seeing him with a new wig, charged him 
with machinating matrimony, which he confessed. It 
is to take place in four days. There are many 
obstacles to marriage here, created by law, in addition 
to those which arise from the state of society. Not so 
many, however, as formerly. The publication, the 
civil ceremony, and the religious ceremony. Home, 
and then to my horologer's. Mr. G. called, and, 
without my knowledge, was denied. Called on him ; 
out. At 4 he came again, a little discomposed by a 
rencontre. He asked me to go and dine with him. 
Went to the Conchale 4 , where we had good fish and 



I Hosier. 
4 So in the MS. 
} For vinaigre. Vinegar. 

4 This restaurant may have been so called from the Latin comha, a shell ; hence a place for 
oysters, fish, etc. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

good potatoes, al' americaitf . He has made a com- 
munication about our Holland Company affair, which, 
I fear, may spoil all. He thinks not ; but it has put 
me quite in a fever. Think I must immediately try 
to get a passport for Holland and go off. 

31. Couche 12. Slept without interruption, and 
so sound that it took Ju. ^ hour to wake me. Rose 
y z p. 8. At 9 came in my taylor 1 , and at 20 my 
botier*, Mr. Abel. The matter is not quite so bad as 
I feared but still bad enough. At 1 1 to Valkenaer's, 
where an hour. He has put out of my head going 
now to Holland, and thinks he can manage the thing 
better by writing. He wrote in my presence, and sent 
the letter to the office. To Fonzi's. To horologer's. 
To Swediaur's ^ hour. To Mr. G.'s y 2 hour. 
Home. Took bro. ches. 4 and Roussillon for dinner. 
Mr. G. came in while I was eating. At y 2 p. 4 took 
a long stroll along the Boulevard. Bought you 
twelve volumes of different things (octavos) for 14 
livres. Think I will buy you no more, except a few 
plays, and some pretty books for Gampillus 5 . On my 

way home met , who invited me to go home 

with him to communicate something. It is that the 
Americans here have entered into a combination 
against A. B. 6 ; that every man who speaks to him 
shall be shunned as unworthy of society ; that no 
master of vessel, or any other person, shall take any let- 
ter or parcel for him, and other like benevolent things; 

I For a I'amiricaini. After the American fashion. 

1. So in the MS. 

3 For tottier. Bootmaker. 

4 For trad, cheese, etc. 

5 It will be noted that Theodosia's boy is called Gampy, Gampillo, Gampillus, etc. 

6 Meaning himself. 

28 



Private "Journal of Aaron Burr . 

all which amused me but alarmed my friend. The 
most violent of this association is a young Seaman, 
son of Edmund Seaman of New York. More of the 
like. Mr. , of Boston, related in a large com- 
pany that he, being on a jury at Boston last summer 
on an insurance case of the Herkimer, Judge Chase 
presiding, and Luther Martin one of the lawyers, on 
some dispute between them, the judge said to Martin, 
" I am surprised that you can so prostitute your 
talents." M. replied, " I never prostituted my talents 
except when I defended you and C. B." 1 ; and added, 
in the hearing of the jury, " a couple of the greatest 
rascals in the world." A Mr. Thompson, of Charles- 
ton, S. C., a Scotchman, but naturalized in the United 
States, now settled here, being asked if he had called 
on Colonel Burr, said, No, and no good American 
would call on him. Eon soir ! Have been reading all 
the evening in Mazzei's " Recberches sur les Etats 
Unis" 1 ; three vols., octavo. This is the same Mazzei 
to whom T. J. J addressed a lettre* which has been pub- 
lished in the American papers. Found him rather 
dull. 

Paris, November i, 1810. Slept as usual my 
eight hours without turning or dreaming. This sort 
of sleeping is striking out of existence so much time. 
What the devil has got into me to sleep at this rate ? 
I, whom three or four hours formerly satisfied. Was 
engaged to call on the Abbe at 1 1 . I got there ^ 

I Meaning Colonel Burr. 

i " Inquiries as to the United States." 

} Thomas Jefferson. 

4 Letter. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

before 12. He has been alite 1 these six years by a 
disorder in the knee, as I believe I told you before. 
He received me with that complacency which seems to 
be his nature. At another time I will tell you his 
history, his escapes from the guillotine during the 
Revolution, &c. Told him my name, and that my 
desire was a passport to return to my country. He 
was quite confounded to learn that I had already been 
presented to several ministers, and had access to them, 
and seemed to be in despair about rendering me any 
service. At length, however, he thought that M'lle 
Vauxhall was my mark ; that she could give me 
counsel, &c., and he wrote a note of introduction to 
M'lle, which I engaged to deliver. What could have 
put it into the good old man's head, that nothing but 
a young lady could serve my purpose ? He remarked 
that M'lle was not young, but had two sisters much 
younger than herself. I shall see M'lle as soon as 
possible, and tell you how things are ; but have very 
little hope of advancing the passport business thereby. 
Home, and thence to Fonzi's, and then to horologer's, 
to whom I paid 22 louis for a watch. Now, don't 
scold, for I can sell it for the same money as soon as 
I shall have no other means of getting bread. A 
period which is not far distant, unless something 
shall grow out of Holland Company. Home again, 
and at 4 set off for Vanderlyn's, having advised 
him some days ago that I should dine with him 
to-day, expecting Crede in town, and having given 

I Bed-ridden. 

30 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

him rendezvous at Vanderlyn's from 5 to 7. At 6 
Crede came in and Vanderlyn went out. Sat till 8 
with C., and then we parted, he engaging to breakfast 
with me to-morrow. Found our house all in uproar. 
A party given by young Pic. et ux. 1 to their young 
friends. There were about twenty. Two of the 
gentlemen played well on the violin, and took turns. 
Several of the dames danced very well. One of the 
Juliens and M'e A. only attracted my particular notice. 
There was one other called beautiful ; a round-faced, 
goggle-eyed, insipid thing to my view. I left the 
party at 12, and go forthwith to bed, though the 
gaiety below is extremely clamorous. 

2. Waked at ^ p. 8. Was astonished to see a 
fire and the materials for breakfast all prepared. Ju. 
had done all this, and I had heard nothing, so sound 
did I sleep. Intended to have gone early to Due 
d'Alberg's and to Valk.'s ; but this eternal sleeping 
spoils all. Crede came in at */ p. 9, and I was then 
scarcely ready to receive him. Had a great breakfast. 
Jul. had bought a Ib. of ham, 32 sous. Don't be 
alarmed. It will last me a week. We talked much, 
and he went off at y% p. 10. At ^ p. n to 
d'Alberg's ; out. To Valkenaer's ; out. To Fonzi's, 
where ^ hour. To Mr. G.'s; out. Forgot to tell 
you that yesterday morning wrote a note to Russell, 
the charge des affairs 1 (see the copy)', to which no reply 
has yet been received. Wrote note to Mr. G. 



1 For it uxtr. Young Picard and wife. 

2 For charge d ' affaires. 
} See note 3, page 39. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

requesting him to be at home till y z p. 12 to-morrow, 
to which he answered this evening, assenting. At 3 
to Swediaur's, and thence to d'Alberg's, whom saw. 
Received me with his usual complacency, but had 
nothing to communicate. Advised me, however, to 
call on Mons. Serrurier, who has been named minis- 
ter to the United States in the room of Turreau. 
Will think of it. Home. Dinner on a slice of the 
said ham and some of the 25 sous wine, which is 
detestable. It is impossible that I should ever get it 
all down, and I will poz. 1 to-morrow go and change it 
for the real Roussillon. At 6 to Vanderlyn's to meet 
Crede, who came in at the same moment. Gave a 
pair of gloves to Cath'e* which with the cbose*, 3 francs 
5 sous. We (Crede and I) parted at 8. Recant. 4 
inspect?^ 2 francs; another, my gloves and 10 sous; 
another resembling exceedingly S. Reeve. We went 
to a M'e de Virf and took supper, 3 francs 10 sous; 
very cheap, costing 25 sous. (La Cordonniere 7 .) Voila^ 
au fo/ie*, 10 francs 10 sous and my glo. 9 ! Gamp, 
quand deviendra tu sage 10 ? Engaged to dine at the 
same place on Monday with the last mentioned (Lize 11 
la Cordonniere). Note this evening from Madame R. 
requesting me to make her a law paper, in a great 



1 For positively. 

2 For Catherine. 

J With the thing, i. ., muse ? 

4 For rencontre. Rencounter. 

5 This may stand either for the French insfectie or English inspected. It may be that 
Burr means that he paid 2 francs for inspection only. 

6 For marchande de vin. Female wine-merchant. 

7 For cordanniire. Female shoemaker, or a shoemaker's wife. 

8 For voi'/a, donn'e a lafolie. Behold, given to folly. 

9 For gloves. 

10 For Gamp, quand deviendrai-tu sage? Gamp, when wilt thou become discreet; 

11 For Eliza or Elizabeth. 



Private 'Journal of Aaron Burr . 

hurry, as all women always are, except you who under- 
stand better than even I do how tofestina lente 1 . 

3. Certain personal concerns kept me up till 2. 
Waked, wide awake, at 6. Got up, lighted candle, 
made fire. Ju. came in at y z p. 7, and greatly aston- 
ished to find me at breakfast, having had bread and 
milk enough of yesterday. At 10 to Valkenaer's, 
where an hour and y z . How good he is! I depos- 
ited with him 2,500 francs, (about 500 dollars). Now 
you will marvel how I could possibly raise so 
enormous a sum, (100 guineas!); that was my 
business all yesterday, which I did not then tell you, 
not knowing whether Valkenaer would take the 
trouble ; not a little, I assure you. Your watch and 
your ring are both pawned for 1000 francs (200 dol- 
lars) ; this, with the remains of the sum had some time 
ago of G., as then mentioned, made this bank. On 
casting up my remains, find I have left just 21 dollars. 
If, therefore, the speculation should fail ! From Val- 
kenaer's went to G.'s. There I was disappointed. 
He had proposed to venture for me 2,000 dollars, but 
had changed his mind. I showed him V.'s receipt ; 
but no ! So back to V.'s and gave him his receipt, 
for I would not ask a receipt from a man who takes so 
much trouble for me gratis. V. seemed extremely 
sensible to this delicacy. Again to G.'s to get his 
writer to copy Mrs. Robertson's law paper. G. 
helped me, too, to draw it. Home at 3. Took bro. 

I Festina lente is a Latin saying, meaning make haste slowly. It came into the Latin from 
the Greek and was first used by Suetonius, the Roman biographer and historian, who wrote in 
the second century A. D. 

33 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

and cas. 1 for dinner, with a good coup* of real Rous- 
sillon. Wrote Madame R. for further information, 
and sent commissionaire*. Note you, we are at least 
one league apart. Sor. at 5 to Le Doux's ; out. To 
my mar'de* de vin y to get him to take back his infer- 
nal 25~sous wine and give me the other, which he very 
chearfully 5 agreed to. To my new shoemaker's ; not 
done. The mechanics here, I tell you, are far worse 
than in America. Home at 7. Jul. brought me a 
nice hot bouillon gras, which I took with great satisfac- 
tion. I may as well tell you now of my economy in 
this wine affair. Eating my bread and cheese, and 
seeing half a bottle of the 25 sous wine left, I thought 
it would be too extravagant to open a bottle of the 
bon 6 ; so I tried my best to get down the mauvaise 7 , 
constantly thinking of the other, which was in sight, and 
trying to persuade myself to give Gamp some of that ; 
but no, I stuck to the bad, and got it all down. Then 
to pay myself for this act of heroism, treated him to a 
large tumbler of the vrai Roussillon, and sallied forth 
to my marchand de vin to engage him to exchange the 
residue. You see I am of Lantara's opinion, that 
though a man may be a little the poorer for drinking 
good wine, yet he is, under its influence, much more 
able to bear poverty. Now, as I live, I don't think 
that among your plays I have bought you " Lan- 



1 For trod and cassonade or Kate. Sec Glossary. 

2 Draught. 

3 For cammissionnalre. Porter. 

4 For marchand. Merchant. 

5 So in the MS. 

6 Good, genuine. 

7 For mauvais. Bad. 



34 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

tara" 1 , though I have seen it twice with pleasure. 
You shall have it to-morrow. Just now a note from 
Madame R., with the further information, and request- 
ing me to dine to-morrow. Have declined the dinner. 
Ju. has promised to buy me potatoes. I shall dine 
better at home ; then, such a trouble to dress and walk 
a league. No answer yet from Mr. Russell. 

4. Hopes of reformation. Coucbe 12. Rose 
at 6, and again dressed and took breakfast by candle- 
light. I cannot account for this caprice. It is impos- 
sible to sleep better. Always one sound nap ; but it 
varies from five to eight hours. Sor. at 9 to Mr. G.'s. 
He was just up. More cool and shy than usual. 
Also had heard a report extremely unfavorable to my 
friend V., of which I don't believe one word. I would 
trust my life with him. The people of this place are 
prone to detraction. If a man speaks of his nearest 
friend (profanity), it is with several buts. The women 
I think less given to that vice than the men. Thence 
to deliver the letter and see the friend of the Abbe. 
A walk of about one league to the Port St. Antoine. 
M'lle Vauxhall is a smart, sensible English woman of 
about 55. The brother not at home. Staid a few 
minutes, and engaged to breakfast with her and him at 
9 to-morrow. To Le Doux's ; out. To Fonzi's r / z 
hour ; engaged to dine with him. To Hahn's ; out. 
Home to wait for Mr. G.'s messenger with the copy 
of Madame R.'s law paper. He came at 3 with the 

I The reference is probably to the one-act vaudeville of Barre, entitled "Lantara ou It 
Ptintre an Cabaret' 1 '' (" Lantara, or the Painter at the Tavern "), which was brought out in 
1809 at the Vaudeville Theatre at Paris. In this play the author caricatured certain weaknesses 
of Simon Mathurin Lantara (17x9-1778), a well-known and eccentric French landscape painter. 

35 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

paper handsomely copied. On perusal, found it so 
full of errors that another copy is indispensable. Off 
to Mr. G.'s, in whose employ the writer is ; all out. 
Then took a long stroll, being a wet, misty, chilly, 
day, as has been the greater part of the last five weeks. 
At 5 to Fonzi's. T: Vanderlyn, Hernandez, le vieux 

* and his son Alexander, a very handsome 

young man. All very social. Staid till */ p. 8. 
The story by F. of the effect of the vice. In Spain, 
when the bell rings, all kneel ; even at the theatre, in 
the most interesting scene, the audience kneel, and the 
actors become statues. Another by Gamp of the 
effect of tragedy in Paris applaud and encore a very 
pathetic speech or action. There has been a great 
feast at our house to-day, at which I was not invited ; 
but when I came in Madame scolded me politely for 
going away without saying anything. They were so 
distressed at my absence. Vanderlyn, for some months 
past, has been urging me to join him in a little menage* 
to which, some days ago, when despairing of a pass- 
port, I consented. To-day he told me that he had 
found lodgings, but that there was accommodation for 
himself, and no room for me. Am in great distress 
about Madame R.'s paper, for I had promised it to 
her to-morrow morning, and it will not be done till 
night. You women are always in such a hurry. In 
a debate to-day about women, Gamp, as always, 
defending, Vanderlyn sais j the reason is, their heads 
are so empty! 



Z For menage. Housekeeping. 
3 So in the MS. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

5. Couche % p. 12. Rose ^ p. 6. The refor- 
mation, you see, continues, and I have hopes that this 
stupor will pass off. Sor. at 8 to breakfast with M'lle 
Vauxhall, being distant about one league. M'lle had 
told me that Mr. V. was very early ; that he break- 
fasted at 8, and went out at 9, but gave me 9 for the 
hour. I was there 10 minutes before 9. Mr. and 
M'lle were abed. I cooled myself this fine Novem- 
ber morning (a drizzling rain and chilling north wind) 
for half an hour in a room without a fire. The 
younger sister (who has a daughter of 19) was up. 
She told me that Mr. Whitesides would be down 
immediately. Mr. Whitesides ! I know nothing of 
Mr. Whitesides, Madam, I called to see M'lle and 
Mr. Vauxhall. Yes, sir, the French can't say White- 
sides, because they have no w in their alphabet, and so 
they call him Vauxhall 1 . At length they came in. 
We had a breakfast al'anglaise z . They appeared 
gened*, and can be of no use to me. He, however, 
mentioned to me Mr. Randall, of New York, an 
acquaintance of my youth, as one who would see me 
with pleasure. To Le Doux's. He speaks greatly in 
favor of my watch as excellent work, and very cheap. 
To the Pal. Roy. to the shoemaker's. Home. At 
12 to Mr. G's. Was not so cool, but less zealous 
in the Holland Company. To horologer's; out. 
To Fonzi's ; busy. T an interview with the U. 4 

I This joke has some of the characteristics of a London fog. 

1 For a Vanglaise, After the English fashion. 

] Meaning bored. See Glossary. 

4 Again it may be said that this character is obscure in the MS. It may stand for a capital 
U, representing possibly the Swedish words jungfru, maid, or it may be for 11, which might be 
designed to represent either of two French words, mademoisillc, young lady, or fille, girl. 

37 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

Home. At 3 to the horologer's, who found at last. 
Thence to my rendezvous to dine with the cordon ere 1 , 
who did not come. Suprenant 1 , so dined alone. An 
excellent dinner in a very poor-looking house ; 4 
francs 10 sous. On my way home renc.; bourgeoise ; 
4 fr. ; assez cont. 1 Again another ; 5 francs. Home 
at 7. Madame, I am writing (now, think on 't) in the 
utmost pain. After my first renc., near the Pont Neuf, 
got badly wounded in the foot by one of those infernal 
hacks ; the story is too long to write. The ^ hour 
I was with Louise (the second renc.}, forgot it, and the 
half hour I have been writing to you idem*, but now 
that I am writing about it, 'tis impossible. Got home 
as well as I could. The foot so swoln 5 that was 
obliged to cut open the boot. Do remind me to tell 
you of a case of conscience which has grown out of this 
matter and been debated between Ju. and Madame B., 
la saint e^. Indeed, I must bed, though it be only 10. 
Madame R.'s paper has come in handsome and correct. 
A note from her this P. M. announces that she sets 
off for England on Thursday. 

6. That vile foot keeps me in such pain that I 
had no repose till just 5. At 9 Ju. waked me with a 
smoking bouillon gras in her hand. This I refused to 
take, and at length persuaded her to put it by for 
dinner, and to make my caf. blanc. With much labor, 
got out of bed at n. Could not put the foot to the 



I Fo 


cordonniirc. 




Z Fo 


surfrenant. Surprising. 




3 Fo 


rencontre; bourgeoise; quatre francs ; an ex, content. 


Rencounter; a woman of the 


middle c 


ass ; 4 francs ; pretty well satisfied. 




4 La 


in. Likewise. 




J So 


n the MS. 





6 One of the servants was called the Saint because of her assumed piety. 

38 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

floor. Bathed it in cold vinegar de Mollerat 1 and have 
continued the process all day. It has produced 
miracles, and now at 1 1 P. M. I can hobble over the 
floor without pain. Before I was out of bed this 
morning, a messenger from Madame R. with invita- 
tion to dine, which, of course, declined. Sent her 
papers. At i came Mr. Fenwick, c. d? consul. I 
did not recollect him, though he is not much altered 
in ten years. It was a mere visit of civility and to 
tender services. Wrote notes to Swediaur, to Vander- 
lyn, and to Crede. At 4 Madame R.'s servant to 
inquire about the foot, proposing to send her carriage 
for me at 4 to propose some alteration in the papers. 
Consented to go in her carriage at 4. A note this 
evening from Mr. Russell in reply to that which I 
wrote to him ist inst 3 . He says that as a fugitive 
from justice A. B. is entitled to no protection and 
other like things which you shall see. Shall reply 
to-morrow. Have been all day reading Tooke's 
"Russia," of which I have bought you a French edition, 



1 Mollerat's vinegar. 

2 For ci-devant. Formerly. 

J The correspondence between Burr and Russell, referred to here and on page ji, was as 
follows. Under date of Paris, November I, 1810, Burr wrote to Russell : " On receipt of Mr. 
Russell's note, Mr. Burr applied to the consul ; a copy of his reply is herewith enclosed. It 
cannot be material to inquire what are the " circumstances " referred to by the consul, nor 
whether true or false. Mr. Burr is ignorant of any statute or instruction which authorizes a 
foreign minister or agent to inquire into any circumstances other than those which tend to 
establish the fact of citizen or not. If, however, Mr. Russell should be of a different opinion, 
Mr. Burr is ready to satisfy him that no circumstances exist which can, by any construction, in 
the slightest degree impair his rights as a citizen, and that the conclusions of the consul are 
founded in error, either in point of fact or of inference. Yet, conceiving that every citizen has 
a right to demand a certificate or passport, Mr. Burr is constrained to renew his application to 
Mr. Russell, to whom the consul has been pleased to refer the decision." 

Under the date of Paris, November 4, 1810, Russell sent the following reply : " Without sub- 
scribing to the opinion of Mr. McRae with regard to the appeal that lays from the erroneous 
decisions of the consul to the charge d'affaires, Mr. Russell has no objection to judging the case 
which Mr. Burr has presented to him. The man who evades the offended laws of his country 
abandons, for the time, the right of their protection. This fugitive from justice, during his 
voluntary exile, has a claim to no other passport than one which will enable him to surrender 
himself for trial for the offences with which he stands charged. Such a passport Mr. Russell 
will furnish to Mr. Burr, but no other." 

39 



Private "Journal of Aaron Burr . 

in six volumes octavo. Vanderlyn came and sat an 
hour this evening. Our family in great distress. 
My good host has lost a lawsuit on which his all 
depended. 

7. Got a good sleep and rose at 9. Read still 
in Tooke's " Russia "'. At 4 the carriage came and I 
went, with the lame foot in a list mokassin 2 . On the 
way took in Menutzi and Jane E., who, with Mr. 
Heath, the English lawyer mentioned some time ago, 
made up the party. At 8 came in Mr. Adamson. 
Note : Mr. H. can't get a passport. He has been 
soliciting for a month, and is in a state of desperation, 
having left his wife, his family, and his business in 
London. He lives here with Denon J , and of course 
has all his influence, but no avail. It was 10 when 
I got home. Sat up till 2 and did not write you a 
line. This is written on Thursday. Madame R. 
asked me to dine to-morrow (Thursday), which I 
declined, but agreed for Friday. On coming home, 
found a gay, friendly note from Crede, apologizing 
for not calling on me, and promising to call to- 
morrow. 

8. Having drank a dish of vile green tea at 
Madame R.'s, it kept me awake till 5. Lay till 10. 



1 Probably referring to the work entitled " A View of the Russian Empire During the Reign 
of Catherine II. and the Close of the Present Century." It appeared in London in 1799 and 
was translated and published in Paris in 1801 and 1806 in six volumes octavo. Its author was 
William Tooke, of England (1744-1820). 

2 Meaning moccasin. 

J Dominique Vivant, Baron Denon (I747~i8z5), was a celebrated French artist and art 
critic. He was a member of the Institute of France and from 1804 till 1815 had, by Napoleon's 
nomination, the title of Directeur General del Musics et de la Monnaie det Medaillet, Director 
General of the Museums and of the Medal Mint. He accompanied Bonaparte in several of his 
campaigns and was the official whose business it was to designate to the Emperor the principal 
objects of art to be transported to Paris with which to enrich the Louvre museum. In his earlier 
years he had been a protege of Louis XV. and later of Robespierre and Madame Beauharnais, 
who became Empress Josephine. 

4 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

No vis. 1 but la b. pet. b/an'se 2 . Took a bouillon gras 
for dinner and eked it out with a roast fowl, a compli- 
ment from J., and excellent potatoes, which with 
Roussillon and bread, butter, cheese, and grapes has 
kept me from starving. At n a note came from 
Madame R. with a bottle of opodeldoc*, in which I 
happened to express faith. She had very often 
intimated a wish that I should know more of Mr. A. 
In my reply to her note, I asked her to tell me can- 
didly whether he would be pleased with a visit from 
me. At 4 received another messenger from her, 
saying that he would be greatly flattered, and proposed 
to call on me to-morrow morning. Agreed to receive 
him at 2. You see into what trouble this will bring 
me. At 5 came Crede and sat an hour. Have agreed 
to take gig and go to see the room which he offers me 
in the same hotel in which he is lodged. Merrihault 
is in town. Bought a bottle of hydromel (metheglan) 
to see how to make it, and a bottle of Mollerat 4 . Ju. 
has brought me into great trouble. Gave her my last 
two guineas to change. She thinking to get two or 
three sous more, went away to her friend, the Abbe, 
full y 2 a league, and gave them to him. He being 
very busy, told her to call in two or three days, and I 
am absolutely sans sous 5 . Just at this moment my 
commissionaire brought me his account of 6 francs 10 
sous, and apologized on account of his great distress. 



1 For visitor. 

2 For la belle fetitt blanchisteuie. The pretty little laundress. 

3 Opodeldoc is a liniment prepared by dissolving Castile soap and camphor in alcohol and 
adding oils of thyme and rosemary, and the stronger water of ammonia. It is also called cam- 
phorated soap liniment. 

4 Meaning Mollerat's vinegar. 
j Penniless. 

41 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

Got rid of this for the moment by borrow just so much 
from Madame Pel. To-morrow will come la blanch- 
issese* for 4 francs 10 sous. I shall be obliged to 
sacrifice some of the nice little pieces which I intended 
to keep for Gampillo. 

9. Had ordered myself to be waked at 7. Ju. 
did her best, but in spite of all her efforts, slept till J4 
p. 9. It was near 12 before I got out, not walking, 
which is not yet practicable, but in a gig. To Crede's; 
his room won't do. Its being in a fourth story and a 
garret would not discourage me ; but it is dark, has 
but one window, a bad fire-place, and so open that it 
must be very cold. To Fenwick's. Both Mr. and 
Madame out. This comes of laying 1 so late abed. 
To Mancel's, to send him on a voyage of discovery. 
Home, stopping to change one of Gamp's pretty little 
Danish ducats 3 , for which got only 8 francs 5 sous. 
Mr. G. had called in my absence. At 3 came in Mr. 
Adamson and sat y 2 hour ; then Mr. G., and soon 
after the carriage of Madame R. called. We took up 
on the way M'e Men. 4 and J. Evans, who, with Mr. 
Lewins, were our party. Poor Heath got his passport 
yesterday, and was instantly ofF. Mr. Adamson came 
in at 7. I staid till near 10, being obliged to wait the 
movement of my companions. Mr. Russell, whose 
sense of duty does not allow him to give me a pass- 
port, has given a general one to Captain Haley, and 
written to the Minister of Police that the Captain has 
entire confidence, &c. 



I For la blanchisseuit. 

z So in the MS. 

\ A Danish ducat was worth about $1.80 United States money. 

4 For Madame Menutzi. 



4 2 



Private 'Journal of Aaron Burr . 

10. Slept again from ^ p. i till */ p. 9, though 
fire was made for me at 7. You can't think how I 
am mortified and distressed at this torpor. Sor. at 12 
in cabriole. This cabri. 1 hire will ruin me. To Mr. 
Fenwick's, whom saw and eke his wife ; belle fern.' 2 ' 
The marks of superior intelligence, much grace and 
animation. We said some civil things to each other, 
and she engaged me to call and see her, which, be 
assured, I shall not fail. Mr. F. goes to-morrow to 
Bordeaux, and offered to take letters for me. Thence 
to Madame R.'s to get the address of Mr. A., and 
thence to Mr. A.'s, where ^ hour. He has the 
appearance of a well-bred, amiable man ; not deficient 
in intelligence or education. Thence back to Madame 
R.'s. She kept me more than two hours. Dismissed 
my cab. and ordered her carriage for me. To go to 
England or not ; to marry or not ; these are the two 
interesting questions which disturb the peace of my 
charming friend. Having hitherto preserved a neu- 
trality on the subject of matrimony, she has, at length, 
extracted from me a promise that I will on Monday 
give a decided opinion as to both points. On my 
return home called on Mr. Fenwick ; out. On Mr. 
G.; out. On the horologer. Home at ^ p. 4. 
Had taken a bowl of soup with Madame R. and now 
took another from Ju., which made dinner enough. 
Sent for a bottle of vin Maron, much vaunted, 25 
sous. Don't like it. Shall stick to the Roussillon. 



I For cabriole. It will be remembered that this is the French word from which our English 
word cab was derived, and that Burr himself writes cab. with a period, to show that it is an 
abbreviation. 

Z For belle femme. 

43 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

Wrote you a letter and one to Gahn this evening, and 
sent them off just now to Mr. Fenwick, who departs 
at 5 to-morrow morning. A most tempestuous wind 
yesterday and to-day. I have not yet learnt 1 what is 
the season that denominates this a fine climate. Have 
not yet answered Russell's impertinent note. 

ii. Couche 12. Slept sound till 4, then waked, 
and, after trying in vain for two hours to sleep, got up 
at 6, shaved, dressed, and got my breakfast by candle- 
light. Ju. came in at 7, all astonished to see every- 
thing done. Raining, and still a tempestuous wind. 
Sor. at 8 on foot, but made bad progress, as the left 
shoe was worn slipshod, and the foot bore but ill the 
irregularities of the pavement. Met a cab. and got in. 
To Crede's ; rang for several minutes, but all asleep. 
Learnt, however, from the porter that Crede pere* was 
not in town. To Abel's to complain of his taylor 1 . 
The culottes* which were to have been done eight days 
ago are not yet begun. To G.'s ; abed. Home. 
P.'j. 4 , 2 francs. Madame R. was to have her car- 
riage for me at n. Waited till ^ before 12. It did 
not come. Sor. encore 3 in cab. to Adamson's, where 
y 2 hour. Saw there, also, Mr. Gerard, a venerable 
man of 88, the best-preserved and the most sprightly 
of that age I ever saw 6 . The aunt of Mr. A. has 

I So in the MS. 

z The elder Crede. (Pirt.) 

3 Breeches. 

4 Probably for prostitution. Burr sometimes uses this word instead of muse or folie. See 
Glossary. 

5 For son or sortis encore. I go or went out again. 

6 It is not certain to whom Burr refers. The man mentioned is, he avers, 88 years of age. 
There were living in Paris iniSil two well-known men of similar name, the one a man of 76, Fran- 
^ois Girard, canon of Notre Dame, who had a score of years earlier been commissioned to assist 
Marie Antoinette during her last moments, and the other, Abbe Philippe Louis Gerard, aged 74, 
canon of St. Louis du Louvre. Burr speaks in the earlier pages of the Journal of an Abbe 
Gerard, probably the latter of the two just mentioned. 

44 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

lived with him these twenty years, having rejected her 
m. 1 To Madame R.'s, whom found expecting me. 
She urged again for my advice and I gave it. First, 
that she should not go to England, and, second, that 
should marry A. if she must at all marry, which she 
avows ; sais* she has not independence and force of 
character to go on a la francoise 1 . For six months I 
have been reasoning against marriage, and in favor of 
a voyage to England. Now that I have taken t'other 
side of these questions, she also has changed her lan- 
guage, and reasons against this marriage and in favor 
of going to England. Took soup and staid an hour. 
Engaged to dine with her to-morrow, and begged her 
to ask A. We shall see whether she does so. Called 
for ^ hour at Mr. G.'s. At the changeur's 4 , where 
changed three more of Gampy's beautiful little pieces. 
Home at 4. Cab. hire, 4 francs 10 sous ! Alas ! my 
lame foot has already cost me a louis in cab. hire and 
medicaments. What pretty things that louis would 
have bought for Gampillo ! Ju. was to have received 
to-day the amount of my two guineas ; but was again 
put off by the priest. Now, as she owes the priest 
money, it would be very pretty if he should take into 
his head to retain these 2 guineas. I have now 3 
francs 4 sous ; about 5 shillings York money 5 . My 
boots are at the shoemaker's to be scaled 6 . They are 
done and I cannot redeem them. It may be yet ten 



I For mart, husband f 

z So in the MS. 

3 For a la fran^aise. 

4 Money changer's. 

J Meaning New York money. 

6 So in the MS. 



45 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

days before I hear the result of my Holland Company 
speculation ; and, if that turns out a total loss why, 

then . Some time ago, Madame R., showing 

me her jewels, seemed particularly pleased with a 
and earring of Italian sculpture out of conch- 
shell. Of course I admired them. To-day she made 
them a present to you. I declined as long as I could, 
for though they are pretty as curiosities, they are things 
not for you to wear. Still, they are very pretty to 
stare at and so you shall have them. 

13. Slept from n till 9 like an oyster. All 
hope of any reformation is abandoned. There must 
be something in the air of Europe disposing to leth- 
argy, for it is most certain that I never slept at this 
rate in America. At 1 1 to Valkenaer's. Went on 
foot, having quite resolved to pay no more cab. hire ; 

among other good reasons, because , as I told 

you yesterday. Got on pretty well. Staid an hour. 
Found there la cbarmte* M'lle Hernandez. Not a 
word from Am. 2 about Holland Company, nor expected 
till Saturday. To Fonzi's and then home. It then 
occurred to me that if I had a very large pair of 
shoes I might clothe this left foot and hobble on very 
smartly. Borrowed 4 francs of Madame Pel., which 
she has often done from me, and sor. for shoes. 
Found a pair of suitable grandeur* for 6 francs 10 
sous, about 10 shillings York money. Can walk with 
them very tolerably. Had left just 1 1 sous. To my 



1 For la charmante. The charming. 

2 For Amsterdam. 

3 Size. 



4 6 



Private y o urn a I of Aaron Burr . 

botiers 1 , or bonnetier's^j as they will have it here, 
and then home. At 4 sat* out on foot to dine with 
Madame Robertson. I had desired that Mr. Adam- 
son might be there and Madame M'i 4 not. It was 
so arranged. J. Ev. s joined us, and the day went off 
very well. Mrs. R. still balancing about going. The 
Evanses go positively on Wednesday. Madame urged 
me so to come to-morrow that engaged to breakfast 
with her. On my way home gave 10 sous to a bl. 
fm. b and got home with i sous 7 en pocbe* and at y 2 p. 
10. Do not find that the walk has done any harm to 
the foot. 

17. Not a word have I written you since Mon- 
day. My foot is still swoln 9 and troublesome. I 
walk with pain and limping. For the last two days I 
have quit opedeldoc and tried cold water, but without 
any sensible benefit. On Sunday Madame 10 sent her 
carriage for me, and I took breakfast with her. She 
has got her passport renewed, and talks of going, but 
I think will not. She urged me to dine, which I 
refused. Got home at 2. Bro. and cas. lt pro prandium 1 *. 
Ju. came in with an air of triumph, having got the 
proceeds of my 2 guineas; 52 francs. It ought to 
have been 53. Then began to calculate how I should 



I For bottier's. Bootmaker's. 
Z Hosier's. 



4 


So 
Fo 


n the MS. 
Madame Menutzi. 




5 


Jar 


e Evans. 




6 


Fo 


belle femme. 




7 


Bu 


r writes I sous instead of I sou. 


This is a fair example of his carelessness. 


8 


In 


my pocket. 




9 


So 


n the MS. 




10 


Fo 


Madame Robertson. 





11 See Glossary. 

12 For fro frandio. Latin. By way of luncheon. 



47 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

dispose of so much money. Having on Monday 
evening engaged with two dans. 1 of good demean.* to 
take coffee with them this evening, thought I would 
devote a cr. 3 to that. Took in my pocket 7 francs 10 
sous, lest the dev. 4 might induce me to spend more. 
It all went, and ran in debt 6 francs more, having 
been deb'd 5 by one that one which liked least. Got 
home very penitent and humble. The foot some- 
thing worse. On Wednesday received note from 
Madame R. entreating me to come either to dine or in 
the evening, as she must see me. Called this morning 
on Mr. Fenwick ; out. On Crede; not in town. On 
Madame Fleury to pay my 6 francs, though it was due 
to the other, whose demeure 6 I did not ask. Madame 
F. asked me to stay and dine on soup and bouilli" 1 ^ (pot 
aufeu*), which agreed ; 5 francs to make some addition 
to the dinner. Staid till 7 and spent 5 francs more. 
Then to Madame R.'s. Found there Mr. A. and 
Madame Men 9 . On entering, " Well," sais 10 R., " I 
have given up the journey and have promised to 
marry him." So I wished them joy. Staid an hour. 
Sent for a cab. and got home at 10. Set down 
Madame Men. Intending to pay 3 francs to the cab.- 
driver, he cheated me in the change and took 4. 
Friday at 10 to Valkenaer's. At last he has a letter 



1 For danseuses. Dancing girls. 

2 Demeanor. 

3 Crown. 

4 The devil. 

j The meaning is to be gathered from the context : the word is not altogether clear in the 
MS. 

6 Abode. 

7 Boiled beef. 

8 Literally, pot at the fire, meaning meat to be boiled to make soup or broth. 

9 For Menutzi. 

10 Usually so spelled in the MS. 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

from Amsterdam, and the report is favorable, but the 
requisite information has not yet come on. Took cab. 
and to Madame Fenwick's. She had given me a 
general invitation to breakfast with her any day at 1 1 . 
At least y% dozen persons came in, had audience, and 
went out. At length the celebrated Barere 1 and 
another to breakfast, and we four breakfasted. Bar- 
rere appears to be worthy of his reputation. I greatly 
admire Madame Fenwick. Home at 2. When I 
was with Valkenaer this morning, he asked me to 
dine, which I refused. He said if I would come he 
would send off for Hennette 2 ; agreed. At 4 to Mr. 
G.'s and then to Valkenaer's. Hennette was there, a 
very fine woman, /'. ., tall, well-made and sprightly. 
After dinner V. proposed to take us to see the Chat 
Mervelleus*. We then went in his carriage, but there 
was no seat to be had. We then went to Franconi's 4 
to see " Angelique " 5 , &c., in which a horse is the 
principal actor ; but Franconi's is not open to-night. 
Home with them to V.'s, and then home at 9. Cab. 
hire. Now to come back to Thursday. I had 



I For Bertrand de Barere de Vieuzac (1755-1814), a famous French politician and agitator. 
He was elected in 1791 to the Convention, in which he voted for the death of the King. In 
April, 1793, he was chosen a member of the Committee of Public Safety. He supported the 
Jacobins in their contest with the Girondists, and became the reporter of the Committee which 
usurped supreme power in July, 1793. He was the first who proposed that " terror should be 
the order of the day," and he dressed the atrocious decrees of the Committee in such flowery 
language that he was called the " Anacreon of the guillotine." He was banished as a regicide in 
1816, but was permitted to return in 1830. He has been called one of the most graceful and 
accomplished liars in history. 

z In the MS. the name looks like Hennette, but is probably meant for Henriette. 

3 For Chat Mer-ueilleux. The Marvelous Cat. 

4 Antoine Franconi (1738-1836), the most famous riding-master of his day, established in 
Paris a sort of circus which had great vogue, and for many years he eclipsed all rivals. At the 
close of 1808 his two sons set up between Rue Saint Honore and Rue de Mont Thabor an estab- 
lishment known as Franconi Brothers' Olympian Circus, where, in addition to equestrian feats, 
pantomimes and ballets were seen. 

J Possibly a representation of the famous episode of Ariosto's " Orlando Furioso," in which 
the beautiful Angelica (Angillquc) is being rescued from her attachment to the isolated rock on 
the Isle of Plaints by the knight Roger, as she is about to be devoured by a great fish. 



49 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr . 

intended to breakfast that day with Fenwick, but 
at 9, just as I was dressed, came Madame R.'s 
servant, with a note and a gig (her carriage being 
at repairs), to bring me to breakfast. Submitted 
and went. She had begun to repent, and thought 
she ought to go to England to arrange her affairs 
before her marriage. I rather confirmed this dis- 
position. Mr. A. came in and there were scenes. 
I made several attempts to go, but she would not 
let me stir. At length got off on promising to 
come back to dine. Home for an hour. To 
Crede's ; not in town. To Fonzi's. At 5 to Madame 
R.'s and to my surprize 1 there was A. to dine with us. 
Seemed all peace and calm and she is to go to 
England. Home at 10. Nine francs to-day in gig 
hire. This day, Saturday, which must be i8th 
November, rose, as the whole of this week, at about 
1/2 p. 8. This invincible torpor has got full possession 
of me and I must wait till the gods shall please to 
work a miracle for my cure. The foot more swoln 1 
this morning ; nevertheless, walked out (my whole 
cash being now one 5 -franc piece) to the horologer's ; 
then to call on Mr. Paschaud, the husband of my dear 
friend of whom you heard so much last spring and 
summer; out. To Swediaur's ^ h. and then to 
Crede's; not come. Returning home, 14 sous for a 
bouquet for Fleury, where called for five minutes 
only. How very sage I can be when I have but half 
a crown ! Dined by special invitation to-day with the 
fam. to meet Mr. Paschaud, who accordingly came. 

I So in the MS. 

5 



Private ^Journal of Aaron Burr . 

Had to walk to Fonzi's this evening on account of a 
derangement of something ; can't find out what. He 
had gone to the play, and I am ill at ease for the want 
of his aid. Now I will strive not to get so much in 
arrear with you again. 

19. Couche 12. Rose y z p. 8. Ju. called me 
twenty times, but it was impossible to get me awake. 
At 10 to breakfast with Mr. G. At n to Valkenaer's. 
Nothing more of Holland Company. But there met 
the most seductive woman, and, I - believe, the most 
beautiful I have seen in France. The only specimen 
I have seen that approaches the idea which one might 
form from reading, of a fine French woman. It is a 
fine mixture of grace, intelligence and voluptuousness. 
To Fonzi's, and then home about 2 ; since which have 
not been out. At 3 came in Mr. G. and staid till y 2 
p. 4. Asked me to go and dine with him, which 
declined. Borrowed of him 50 francs, of which 2 to 
Ju. in part of her account; 12 francs to Jeannette for 
the last two months' service, which grudged much, for 
she has done nothing but clean my shoes, and 
that very badly, and yet the beast growled ; three 
francs for segars, and 2 for * * * *' ; so that 
you see I have left just 25 ; and with the most 
deliberate malice and forethought, have resolved to 
dine with Fleury to-morrow or next day, which will 
be an affair of 6 or 8 francs. The dom. of Madame 
R. came in to solicit my aid auprez de Madame* to get 
her off to England and get her rid of A. It seems 

I An undecipherable word ; it looks like an abbreviation of sundries. 

1 For aufrii de Madame. With Madame ; >'. ., to use my influence with Madame. 

5 1 



Private Journal of Aaron Burr. 

that the journey is talked off in the same undecided 
way, but A. is constantly there. 

19, 20, 21. On looking at the almanac it is 
found that Sunday was the i8th and not 19 as stated. 
Again I am in arrear with the Journal. Have slept 
these three nights my full eight hours. It has come 
into my head that this Roussillon wine may, perhaps, 
have some narcotic quality, for I can recollect no other 
change in my habits of life. Have not touched it 
to-day. Monday, breakfasted with Madame Robert- 
son at 10. She gave me honey, but vile gunpowder 
tea. She is still " going," but not gone. The prob- 
ability is that she will be going till worse weather sets 
in, and then, " Lord, who could think of going in 
such weather ?" Urged me to dine, which refused. 
Called at Crede's ; not come. At Vanderlyn's, who 
has moved his lodgings, but not his at teller 1 . To the 
little inn, where once supped with la cordonniere^ to see 
what has become of her. She had called half a dozen 
times to know whether I had been to inquire, and left 
apologies about the disappointment. So engaged to 
meet there to dine to-morrow at 5. The hostess 
engaged to find her. Home, and dine ; pom. de t* 
Ju. added the wing of a duck. Tuesday, took break- 
fast (caf. blanc] at home. That tea of Madame R.'s 
does not agree with me. To Madame R.'s at n. 
Kept me y 2 hour making her toilette. Still going. 
To Crede's ; out. To Fleury's, whom took in hack 



1 For atelier. 

2 For fommes de terre . Potatoes. Literally, apples of the earth. 



Private 'Journal of Aaron Burr . 

to see Vanderlyn's Ariadne' 1 . Left Fleury at her 
home, and home. Mr. G. came in at 3 and sat till 4. 
Mr. Adamson had called in my absence and left card. 
At 5 to dine with la cordon re*, but could not be found, 
so dined alone. Dinner and bottle of wine of 30 sous, 
cost 3 francs. The wine, you see, was just one-half. 
Had two pigeons and potatoes dressed to my taste ; 
bread, butter, and cheese, which, at 30 sous, was cheap 
enough. Home at 6. 

21. At 1 1 to Valkenaer's. Sick abed, and not 
visible. Was overtaken in the street by Mons. 
Mercier 3 , who was so civil to me in Brunswick. He 
seemed very glad to see me, but, note, he has been 
three weeks in town and had not yet found me out, 
nor, perhaps, inquired for me. He told me of Rob- 
inson and Hosack. The former staid at Blakenburg 4 
till this month and thence has gone to pass the winter 
in Berlin. Hosack, while at Blakenburg, went shoot- 
ing and in shooting at a hare shot a man ; not dead, 
but wounded him badly, which cost him money and 
gave him much trouble. When he got rid of that 
affair he left the place, but whither gone is not known. 
Mons. Mercier and I talked for ^ hour in the street, 
exchanged addresses and parted, he engaging to call 
on me at 3 to-morrow. To-day am afoot and with a 
pair of great thick new shoes, the right shoe being 
made large out of complaisance to the left. I walk 

1 The subject of one of Vanderlyn's paintings. Ariadne was the daughter of Minos, King 
of Crete, became the lover of Theseus, and gave him a clew by which he was able to find his 
way out of the Cretan labyrinth. 