Alexander Hamilton Speech in the New York Convention, 24 June 1788
I am persuaded, Mr. Chairman, that I in my turn, shall be indulged, in addressing the
committee—We all, with equal sincerity, profess to be anxious for the establishment of a
republican government, on a safe and solid basis—It is the object of the wishes of every honest
man in the United States, and I presume I shall not be disbelieved, when I declare, that it is an
object of all others the nearest and most dear to my own heart. The means of accomplishing
this great purpose become the most important study, which can interest mankind. It is our duty
to examine all those means with peculiar attention, and to chuse the best and most effectual. It
is our duty to draw from nature, from reason, from examples, the justest principles of policy,
and to pursue and apply them in the formation of our government. We should contemplate and
compare the systems, which, in this examination, come under our view, distinguish, with a
careful eye, the defects and excellencies of each, and discarding the former, incorporate the
latter, as far as circumstances will admit, into our constitution. If we pursue a different course
and neglect this duty, we shall probably disappoint the expectations of our country and of the
world.
In the commencement of a revolution, which received its birth from the usurpations of tyranny,
nothing was more natural, than that the public mind should be influenced by an extreme spirit
of jealousy. To resist these encroachments, and to nourish this spirit, was the great object of all
our public and private institutions. The zeal for liberty became predominant and excessive. In
forming our confederation, this passion alone seemed to actuate us, and we appear to have
had no other view than to secure ourselves from despotism. The object certainly was a valuable
one, and deserved our utmost attention: But, Sir, there is another object, equally important,
and which our enthusiasm rendered us little capable of regarding—I mean a principle of
strength and stability in the organization of our government, and vigor in its operations. This
purpose could never be accomplished but by the establishment of some select body, formed
peculiarly upon this principle. There are few positions more demonstrable than that there
should be in every republic, some permanent body to correct the prejudices, check the
intemperate passions, and regulate the fluctuations of a popular assembly. It is evident that a
body instituted for these purposes must be so formed as to exclude as much as possible from
its own character, those infirmities, and that mutability which it is designed to remedy. It is
therefore necessary that it should be small, that it should hold its authority during a
considerable period, and that it should have such an independence in the exercise of its
powers, as will divest it as much as possible of local prejudices. It should be so formed as to be
the center of political knowledge, to pursue always a steady line of conduct, and to reduce
every irregular propensity to system. Without this establishment, we may make experiments
without end, but shall never have an efficient government.
It is an unquestionable truth, that the body of the people in every country desire sincerely its
prosperity: But it is equally unquestionable, that they do not possess the discernment and
stability necessary for systematic government. To deny that they are frequently led into the
grossest errors by misinformation and passion, would be a flattery which their own good sense
must despise. That branch of administration especially, which involves our political relation 
2
with foreign states, a community will ever be incompetent to. These truths are not often held
up in public assemblies—but they cannot be unknown to any who hear me. From these
principles it follows that there ought to be two distinct bodies in our government—one which
shall be immediately constituted by and peculiarly represent the people, and possess all the
popular features; another formed upon the principles, and for the purposes before explained.
Such considerations as these induced the convention who formed your state constitution, to
institute a senate upon the present plan. The history of ancient and modern republics had
taught them, that many of the evils which these republics suffered arose from the want of a
certain balance and mutual controul indispensible to a wise administration—They were
convinced that popular assemblies are frequently misguided by ignorance, by sudden impulses
and the intrigues of ambitious men; and that some firm barrier against these operations was
necessary: They, therefore, instituted your senate, and the benefits we have experienced, have
fully justified their conceptions.
Now Sir, what is the tendency of the proposed amendment? To take away the stability of
government by depriving the senate of its permanency: To make this body subject to the same
weakness and prejudices, which are incident to popular assemblies, and which it was instituted
to correct; and by thus assimilating the complexion of the two branches, destroy the balance
between them. The amendment will render the senator a slave to all the capricious humors
among the people. It will probably be here suggested, that the legislatures—not the people—
are to have the power of recall. Without attempting to prove that the legislatures must be in a
great degree the image of the multitude, in respect to federal affairs, and that the same
prejudices and factions will prevail; I insist, that in whatever body the power of recall is vested,
the senator will perpetually feel himself in such a state of vassalage and dependence, that he
never can possess that firmness which is necessary to the discharge of his great duty to the
union.
Gentlemen, in their reasoning, have placed the interests of the several states, and those of the
United States in contrast—This is not a fair view of the subject—They must necessarily be
involved in each other. What we apprehend is, that some sinister prejudice, or some prevailing
passion, may assume the form of a genuine interest. The influence of these is as powerful as
the most permanent conviction of the public good; and against this influence we ought to
provide. The local interests of a state ought in every case to give way to the interests of the
Union: For when a sacrifice of one or the other is necessary, the former becomes only an
apparent, partial interest, and should yield, on the principle that the small good ought never to
oppose the great one. When you assemble from your several counties in the legislature, were
every member to be guided only by the apparent interest of his county, government would be
impracticable. There must be a perpetual accommodation and sacrifice of local advantage to
general expediency—But the spirit of a mere popular assembly would rarely be actuated by this
important principle. It is therefore absolutely necessary that the senate should be so formed, as
to be unbiassed by false conceptions of the real interests, or undue attachment to the apparent
good of their several states.
3
Gentlemen indulge too many unreasonable apprehensions of danger to the state
governments—They seem to suppose, that the moment you put men into the national council,
they become corrupt and tyrannical, and lose all their affection for their fellow-citizens. But can
we imagine that the senators will ever be so insensible of their own advantage, as to sacrifice
the genuine interest of their constituents? The state governments are essentially necessary to
the form and spirit of the general system. As long, therefore, as Congress have a full conviction
of this necessity, they must, even upon principles purely national, have as firm an attachment
to the one as to the other. This conviction can never leave them, unless they become madmen.
While the constitution continues to be read, and its principles known, the states must, by every
rational man, be considered as essential component parts of the union; and therefore the idea
of sacrificing the former to the latter is totally inadmissible.
The objectors do not advert to the natural strength and resources of the state governments,
which will ever give them an important superiority over the general government. If we compare
the nature of their different powers, or the means of popular influence which each possesses,
we shall find the advantage entirely on the side of the states. This consideration, important as it
is, seems to have been little attended to. The aggregate number of representatives throughout
the states may be two thousand. Their personal influence will therefore be proportionably
more extensive than that of one or two hundred men in Congress. The state establishments of
civil and military officers of every description, infinitely surpassing in number any possible
correspondent establishments in the general government, will create such an extent and
complication of attachments, as will ever secure the predilection and support of the people.
Whenever, therefore, Congress shall meditate any infringement of the state constitutions, the
great body of the people will naturally take part with their domestic representatives. Can the
general government withstand such a united opposition? Will the people suffer themselves to
be stripped of their privileges? Will they suffer their legislatures to be reduced to a shadow and
a name? The idea is shocking to common sense.
From the circumstances already explained, and many others which might be mentioned, results
a complicated, irresistable check, which must ever support the existence and importance of the
state governments. The danger, if any exists, flows from an opposite source.—The probable evil
is, that the general government will be too dependent on the state legislatures, too much
governed by their prejudices, and too obsequious to their humours; that the states, with every
power in their hands, will make encroachments on the national authority, till the union is
weakened and dissolved.
Every member must have been struck with an observation of a gentleman from Albany [John
Lansing, Jr.]. Do what you will, says he, local prejudices and opinions will go into the
government. What! shall we then form a constitution to cherish and strengthen these
prejudices? Shall we confirm the distemper instead of remedying it? It is undeniable that there
must be a controul somewhere. Either the general interest is to controul the particular
interests, or the contrary. If the former, then certainly the government ought to be so framed,
as to render the power of controul efficient to all intents and purposes; if the latter, a striking
absurdity follows: The controuling powers must be as numerous as the varying interests, and 
4
the operations of government must therefore cease: For the moment you accommodate these
differing interests, which is the only way to set the government in motion, you establish a
general controuling power. Thus, whatever constitutional provisions are made to the contrary,
every government will be at last driven to the necessity of subjecting the partial to the universal
interest. The gentlemen ought always, in their reasoning, to distinguish between the real,
genuine good of a state, and the opinions and prejudices which may prevail respecting it: The
latter may be opposed to the general good, and consequently ought to be sacrificed; the
former is so involved in it, that it never can be sacrificed. Sir, the main design of the convention,
in forming the senate, was to prevent fluctuations and cabals: With this view, they made that
body small, and to exist for a considerable period. Have they executed this design too far? The
senators are to serve six years. This is only two years longer than the senators of this state hold
their places. One third of the members are to go out every two years; and in six, the whole
body may be changed. Prior to the revolution, the representatives in the several colonies were
elected for different periods; for three years, for seven years, &c. Were those bodies ever
considered as incapable of representing the people, or as too independent of them? There is
one circumstance which will have a tendency to increase the dependence of the senators on
the states, in proportion to the duration of their appointments. As the state legislatures are in
continual fluctuation, the senator will have more attachments to form, and consequently a
greater difficulty of maintaining his place, than one of shorter duration. He will therefore be
more cautious and industrious to suit his conduct to the wishes of his constituents.
Sir, when you take a view of all the circumstances which have been recited, you will certainly
see, that the senators will constantly look up to the state governments, with an eye of
dependence and affection. If they are ambitious to continue in office, they will make every
prudent arrangement for this purpose, and, whatever may be their private sentiments of
politics, they will be convinced, that the surest means of obtaining a re-election will be a
uniform attachment to the interests of their several states.
The gentlemen to support their amendment have observed that the power of recall, under the
old government, has never been exercised. There is no reasoning from this. The experience of a
few years, under peculiar circumstances, can afford no probable security that it never will be
carried into execution, with unhappy effects. A seat in congress has been less an object of
ambition; and the arts of intrigue, consequently, have been less practised. Indeed, it has been
difficult to find men, who were willing to suffer the mortifications, to which so feeble a
government and so dependent a station exposed them.

Sir, if you consider but a moment the purposes, for which the senate was instituted, and the
nature of the business which they are to transact, you will see the necessity of giving them
duration. They, together with the President, are to manage all our concerns with foreign
nations: They must understand all their interests, and their political systems. This knowledge is
not soon acquired—But a very small part is gained in the closet. Is it desirable then that new
and unqualified members should be continually thrown into that body? When public bodies are
engaged in the exercise of general powers, you cannot judge of the propriety of their conduct,
but from the result of their systems. They may be forming plans, which require time and 
5
diligence to bring to maturity. It is necessary, therefore, that they should have a considerable
and fixed duration, that they may make their calculations accordingly. If they are to be
perpetually fluctuating, they can never have that responsibility which is so important in
republican governments. In bodies subject to frequent changes, great political plans must be
conducted by members in succession: A single assembly can have but a partial agency in them,
and consequently cannot properly be answerable for the final event. Considering the senate
therefore with a view to responsibility, duration is a very interesting and essential quality. There
is another view, in which duration in the senate appears necessary. A government, changeable
in its policy, must soon lose its sense of national character, and forfeit the respect of
foreigners—Senators will not be solicitous for the reputation of public measures, in which they
have had but a temporary concern, and will feel lightly the burthen of public disapprobation, in
proportion to the number of those who partake of the censure. Our political rivals will ever
consider our mutable counsels as evidence of deficient wisdom, and will be little apprehensive
of our arriving at any exalted station in the scale of power. Such are the internal and external
disadvantages which would result from the principle contended for. Were it admitted, I am
firmly persuaded, Sir, that prejudices would govern the public deliberations, and passions rage
in the counsels of the union. If it were necessary, I could illustrate my subject by historical facts:
I could travel through an extensive field of detail, and demonstrate that wherever the fatal
principle of—the head suffering the controul of the members, has operated, it has proved a
fruitful source of commotions and disorder.
This, Sir, is the first fair opportunity that has been offered, of deliberately correcting the errors
in government. Instability has been a prominent and very defective feature in most republican
systems.—It is the first to be seen, and the last to be lamented by a philosophical enquirer. It
has operated most banefully in our infant republics. It is necessary that we apply an immediate
remedy, and eradicate the poisonous principle from our government

Dr Sir,
I lose no time in replying to your letter of the 17- this day received.
My opinion is, after mature reflection, that if Jefferson and Burr come with equal votes to
the House of Representatives, the former ought to be preferred by the [struck: House of
Representatives] Federalists. Mr
. Jefferson is respectably known in Europe – Mr
. Burr little and
that little not advantageously for [struck: the] [inserted: a] President of the U States – Mr
.
Jefferson is a man of easy fortune – Mr
. Burr, as I believe, a bankrupt beyond redemption, unless
by some coup at the expence of the public, and his habits of expence are such that Wealth he
must have at any rate – Mr
. Jefferson is a man of fair character for probity – Very different ideas
are entertained of Mr
. Burr by his enemies and what his friends think, you may collect from this
anecdote – A lady said to Edward Livingston ironically "I am told Mr
. Burr will be President
[2] I should like it very well if I had not [struck: been told] [inserted: heard] that he is a man
without property –"Let him alone for that replied Edward – If he is President for four years he
will remove the objection" – Mr
. Jefferson, though too revolutionary in his notions, is yet a lover
of liberty and will be desirous of something like orderly Government – Mr
. Burr loves nothing
but himself – thinks of nothing but his own aggrandizement – and will be content with nothing
short of permanent power [struck: and] in his own hands – No compact, that he should make
with any [struck: other] passion in his [struck: own] breast except [struck: his] Ambition, could
be relied upon by himself – How then should we be able to rely upon any agreement with him?
Mr
. Jefferson, I suspect will not dare much Mr
. Burr will [inserted in margin: dare every thing in
the sanguine hope of effecting every thing –]
If Mr
. Jefferson is likely from predilection for France to draw the Country into War on
her side – Mr. Burr will certainly endeavour to do it for the sake of creating the means of
personal power and wealth.
[3] This portrait is the result of long and attentive observation on a [strikeout] man with
whom I am personally well – and in respect to whose character I have had peculiar opportunities 
of forming a correct judgment.
By no means, my Dear Sir, let the Federalists be responsible for his Elevation – In a
choice of Evils let them take the least – Jefferson is in every view less dangerous than Burr.
But we ought – still to seek some advantages from our situation. It may be adviseable to
make it [strikeout] [inserted: a] ground of exploration with Mr
. Jefferson or his confidential
friends and the means of obtaining from him some assurances of his future conduct. The three
essential points for us to secure is. 1 The continuance of the neutral plan bonafide towards the
belligerent powers 2 The preservation of the present System of public credit - 3 The maintenance
& gradual increase of our navy. Other matters may be left to take their chance.
While I have my pen in [4] hand, I will express some ideas to you about the Convention
with France – I am far from approving several of its features but I am clear that it ought now to
be ratified having been negotiated & that the not doing of it would ruin the Federal party, hazard
our internal tranquillity, and leave the door open for a worse arrangement under the new
Administration.
One question will be whether this Treaty is compatible with our [struck: Federal]
engagements to Great Britain. I hold it to be the better opinion that it is. It seems to me that the
annulling of our Treaties with France is a matter between her and us by which another power
ought neither to gain nor lose – that in terminating these differences we might have gone back to
the Status quo ante bellum & that no power not put in worse situation than before would have a
right to complain

Sir, no man agrees more perfectly than myself to the main principle for which the gentlemen contend.I agree that there should be a broad democratic branch in the national legislature. But this matter, Sir, depends on circumstances; It is impossible, in the first instance to be precise and exact with regard to the number; and it is equally impossible to determine to what point it may be proper in future to increase it. On this ground I am disposed to acquiesce. In my reasonings on the subject of government, I rely more on the interests and the opinions of men, than on any speculative parchment provisions whatever. I have found, that Constitutions are more or less excellent, as they are more or less agreeable to the natural operation of things: I am therefore disposed not to dwell long on curious speculations, or pay much attention to modes and forms; but to adopt a system, whose principles have been sanctioned by experience; adapt it to the real state of our country; and depend on probable reasonings for its operation and result. I contend that sixty-five and twenty-six in two bodies afford perfect security, in the present state of things; and that the regular progressive enlargement, which was in the contemplation of the General Convention, will leave not an apprehension of danger in the most timid and suspicious mind. It will be the interest of the large states to increase the representation: This will be the standing instruction to their delegates. But, say the gentlemen, the Members of Congress will be interested not to increase the number, as it will diminish their relative influence. In all their reasoning upon the subject, there seems to be this fallacy: They suppose that the representative will have no motive of action, on the one side, but a sense of duty; or on the other, but corruption: They do not reflect, that he is to return to the community; that he is dependent on the will of the people, and that it cannot be his interest to oppose their wishes. Sir, the general sense of the people will regulate the conduct of their representatives. I admit that there are exceptions to this rule: There are certain conjunctures, when it may be necessary and proper to disregard the opinions which the majority of the people have formed: But in the general course of things, the popular views and even prejudices will direct the actions of the rulers.

All governments, even the most despotic, depend, in a great degree, on opinion. In free republics, it is most peculiarly the case: In these, the will of the people makes the essential principle of the government; and the laws which control the community, receive their tone and spirit from the public wishes. It is the fortunate situation of our country, that the minds of the people are exceedingly enlightened and refined: Here then we may expect the laws to be proportionably agreeable to the standard of perfect policy; and the wisdom of public measures to consist with the most intimate conformity between the views of the representative and his constituent. If the general voice of the people be for an increase, it undoubtedly must take place: They have it in their power to instruct their representatives; and the State Legislatures, which appoint the Senators, may enjoin it also upon them. Sir, if I believed that the number would remain at sixty-five, I confess I should give my vote for an amendment; though in a different form from the one proposed.

The amendment proposes a ratio of one for twenty thousand: I would ask, by what rule or reasoning it is determined, that one man is a better representative for twenty than thirty thousand? At present we have three millions of people; in twenty-five years, we shall have six millions; and in forty years, nine millions: And this is a short period, as it relates to the existence of the States. Here then, according to the ratio of one for thirty thousand, we shall have, in forty years, three hundred representatives, If this be true, and if this be a safe represntation, why be dissatified? Why embarress the Constitution with amendments, that are merely speculative and useless. I agree with the gentleman, that a very small number might give some colour for suspicion: I acknowledge, that ten would be unsafe; on the other hand, a thousand would be too numerous. But I ask him, why will not nintey-one be an adequate and safe representation? This is at present appears to be the proper medium. Besides, the President of the United States will be himself the representative of the people. From the competition that ever subsists between the branches of governement, the President will be induced to protect their rights, whenever they are invaded by either branch. On whatever side we view the this subject, we discover the various and powerful checks to the encroachments of Congress. The true and permament interests of the members are opposed to corruption: Their number is vastly too large for easy combination: The rivalship between the houses will forever prove an insurperable obstcale: The people have an obvious and powerful protection in their State governemnts: Should any thing dangerous be attempted, these bodies of perpetual observation, will be capable of forming and conducting plans of regular opposition. Can we suppose the people’s love of liberty will not, under the incitement of their legislative leaders, be roused into resistance, and the madness of tyranny be extinguished at a blow? Sir, the danger is too distant; it is beyond all rational calculations.

It has been observed by an honorable gentleman, that a pure democracy, if it were practicable, would be the most perefect government. Experience has proved, that no position in politics is more false than this.The ancient democracies, in which the people themsleves deliberated, never possessed one feature of good government. Their very character was tryanny; their figure deformity: When they assembled, the field of debate presented an ungovernable mob, not only incapable of deliberation, but prepared for every enormity. In these assemblies, the enemies of the people brought forward their plans of ambition systematically. They were opposed by their enemies of another party; and it became a matter of contingency, whether the people subjected themselves to be led blindly by one tyrant or by another.

It was remarked yesterday, that a numerous representation was necessary to obtain the confidence of the people. This is not generally true. THe confidence of the people will easily be gained by a good administration. This is the true touchstone. I could illustrate the position. by a variety of historical examples, both ancient and modern. In Sparta, the Ephori were a body of magistrates, instituted as a check upon the senate, and representing the people. They consisted of only five men: But they were able to protect their rights, and therefore enjoyed their confidence and attactment. In Rome, the people were represented by three Tribunes, who were afterwards increased to ten. Every one acquainted with the history of that republic, will recollect how powerful a check to the senatorial encroachments, this small body proved; how unlimited a confidence was placed by them by the people whose guardians they were; and to what a conspicuous station in the government, their influence at length elevated the Plebians. Massachusetts has three hundred representatives; New York has sixty-five. Have the people been in this state less confidence in their representation, than the people of that? Delaware has twenty-one: Do the inhabitants of New-York feel a higher confiedence than those fo Delaware? I have stated these examples, to prove that the gentleman’s principle is not just. The popular confidence depends on circumstances very distinct from the considerations of number. Probably the public attachment is more strongly secured by a train of prosperous events, which are the result of wise deliberation and vigerous execution, and to which large bodies are much less competent than small ones. If the representative conducts with propriety, he will necessarily enjoy the good will of the constituent. It appears then, if my reasoning be just, that the clause is perfectly proper, upon the principles of the gentleman who contends of the admendment: as there is in it the greatest degree of present security, and a moral certainty of an increase equal to our utmost wishes.

It has been farther, by the gentlemen in opposition, observed, that a large representation is necessary to understand the interests of the people. This principle is by no means true in the extent to which the gentleman seems to carry it. I would ask, why may not a man understand the interests of thirty as well as of twenty? The position appears to be made upon the unfounded presumption, that all the interests of all parts of the community must be represented. No idea is more erroneous than this. Only such interests are proper to be represented, as are involved in the powers of the General Government. These interests come compleatly under the observation of one, or a few men; and the requisite information is by no means augmented in proportion to the increase of number. What are the objects of the Government? Commerce, taxation, &c. In order to comprehend the interests of commerce, is it necessary to know how wheat is raised, and in what proportion it is produced in one district and in another? By no means. Neither is this species of knowledge necessary in general calculations upon the subject of taxation. The information necessary for these purposes, is that which is open to every intelligent enquirer; and of which, five men may be as perfectly possessed as fifty. In royal governments, there are usually particular men to whom the business of taxation is committed. These men have the forming of systems of finance; and the regulation of the revenue. I do not mean to commend this practice. It proves however, this point; that a few individuals may be competent to these objects; and that large numbers are not necessary to perfection in the science of taxation. But granting, for a moment, that this minute and local knowledge of the gentlemen contend for, is necessary, let us see, if under the New Constitution, it will not probably be found in the representation. The natural and proper mode of holding elections, will be to divide the state into districts, in proportion to the number to be elected. This state will consequently be divided at first into six. One man from each district will probably possess all the knowledge the gentlemen can desire. Are the senators of this state more ignorant of the interests of the people, than the assembly? Have they not ever enjoyed their confidence as much? Yet, instead of six districts, they are elected in four; and the chance of their being collected from the smaller divisions of the state consequently diminished. Their number is but twenty-four; and their powers are co-extensive with those of the assembly, and reach objects, which are most dear to the people–life, liberty and property.

Sir, we hear constantly a great deal, which is rather calculated to awake our passions, and create prejudices, than to conduct us to truth, and teach us our real interests. I do not suppose this to be the design of the gentlemen. Why then are we told so often of an aristocracy? For my part, I hardly know the meaning of this word as it is applied. If all we hear be true, this government is really a very bad one. But who are the aristocracy among us? Where do we find men elevated to a perpetual rank above their fellow citizens; and possessing powers entirely independent of them? The arguments of the gentlemen only go to prove that there are men who are rich, men who are poor, some who are wise, and others who are not–. That indeed every distinguished man is an aristocrat. This reminds me of a description of the aristocrats, I have seen in a late publication, styled the Federal Farmer. The author reckons in the aristocracy, all governors of states, members of Congress, chief magistrates, and all officers of the militia. This description, I presume to say, is ridiculous. The image is a phantom. Does the new government render a rich man more eligible than a poor one? No. It requires no such qualification. It is bottomed on the broad and equal principle of your state constitution.

Sir, if the people have it in their option, to elect their most meritorious men; is this to be considered as an objection? Shall the constitution oppose their wishes, and abridge their most invaluable privilege? While property continues to be pretty equally divided, and a considerable share of information pervades the community; the tendency of the people’s suffrages, will be to elevate merit even from obscurity. As riches increase and accumulate in few hands; as luxury prevails in society; virtue will be in a greater degree considered as only a graceful appendage of wealth, and the tendency of things will be to depart from the republican standard. This is the real disposition of human nature: It is what, neither the honorable member nor myself can correct. It is a common misfortune, that awaits our state constitution, as well as all others.

There is an advantage incident to large districts of election, which perhaps the gentleman, admist all thier apprehensions of influence and bribery, have not adverted to. In large districts, the corruption of the electors is much more difficult: Combinations for the purpose of intrigue are less easily formed: Factions and cabals are little known. In a small district, wealth will have a more complete influence; because this influence has fewer objects to act upon. It has been remarked, that it would be disagreeable to the middle class of men to go to the seat of the new government. If this be so, the difficulty will will be enhanced by the gentleman’s proposal. If his arguement be true, it proves, that the larger the representation is, the less will be your choice of having it filled. But, it appears to me frivolus to bring forward such arguements as these. It has answered no other prupose, than to induce me, by way of reply, to enter into any discussions, which I consider as usless, and not applicable to our subject.

It is a harsh doctrine, that men grow wicked in proportion as they improve and enlighten their minds. Experience has by no means justified us in the supposition, that there is more virtue in one class of men than in another. Look through the rich and the poor of the community; the learned and the ignorant. Where does virtue predominate? The difference indeed consists, not in the quantity but kind of vices, which are incident to the various classes; and here the advantage of character belongs to the wealthy. Their vices are probably more favorable to the prosperity of the state, than those of the indigent; and partake less of moral depravity.

After all, Sir, we must submit to this idea, that the true principle of a republic is, that the people should choose whom they please to govern them. Representation is imperfect, in proportion as the current of popular favour is checked. This great source of free government, popular election, should be perfectly pure, and the most unbounded liberty allowed. Where this principle is adhered to; where, in the orginization of government, the legislature, executive, and judicial branches are rendered distinct; where again the legislature is divided into seperate houses, and the operations of each are controuled by various checks and balances, and above all, by the vigilance and weight of the state governments; to talk of tyranny, and the subversion of our liberties, is to speak the language of enthusiasm. This balance between the national and state governments ought to be dwelt on with peculiar attention, as it is of the utmost importance. It forms a double security to the people. If one encroaches on their rights, they will find a powerful protection in the other. indeed they will both be prevented from overpassing their constitutional limits, by a certain rivalship, which will ever subsist between them. I am persuaded, that a firm union is as unecessary to perpetuate our liberties, as it is to make us respectable; and expeience will probably prove, that the national government will be as natural a guardian of our freedom, as the state legislatures themselves.

Suggestions, Sir, of an extrodinary nature, have been frequently thrown out in the course of the present political controversy. It gives me pain to dwell on topics of this kind; and I wish they might be dismissed. We have been told, that the old Confederation has proved inefficacious, only because intriguing and powerful men, aiming at a revolution, have been forever instigating the people, and rendering them disaffected with it. This, Sir, is a false insinuation. The thing is impossible. I will venture to assert, that no combination of designing men under Heaven, will be capable of making a government unpopular, which is in its principles a wise and good one; and vigorous in its operations.

The Confederation was framed amidst the agitation and tumult of society. It was composed of unfound materials put together in haste. Men of intelligence discovered the feebleness of the structure, in the first stages of its existence; but the great body of the people, too much engrossed with their distresses, to contemplate any but immediate causes of them, were ignorant of the defects of their Constitution. But, when the dangers of war were removed, they saw clearly what they had suffered, and what they had yet to suffer from a feeble form of government. There was no need of discerning men to convince the people of their unhappy situation-the complaint was co-existive with the evil, and both were common to all classes of the community. We have been told, that the spirit of patriotism and love of liberty are almost extinguished among the people; and that it has become the prevailing doctrine, that republican principles ought to be hooted out of the world. Sir, I am confident that such remarks as these are rather occasioned by the heat of arguement, than by a cool conviction of their truth and justice. As far as my experience has extended, I have heard no such doctrine, nor have I discovered any diminution of regard for those rights and liberties, in defence of which, the people have fought and suffered. There have been, undoubtedly, some men who have had speculative doubts on the subject of government; but the principles of republicanism are founded on too firm a basis to be shaken by a few speculative and sceptical reasoners. Our error has been of a very different kind. We have erred through excess of caution, and a zeal false and impracticable. Our counsels have been destitute of consistency and stability. I am flattered with a hope, Sir, that we have now found a cure for the evils under which we have so long labored. I trust, that the proposed Constitution affords a genuine speccimen of representative and republican government-and that it will answer, in an eminent degree, all the beneficial purposes of society.

 am affectionately attached to Republican theory ... & I add
that I have strong hopes of the success of that theory; but in
candor I ought also to add that I am far from being without
doubts. I consider its success as yet a problem. It is yet to be
determined by experience whether it be consistent with that
stability and order in Government which are essential to
public strength & private security and happiness. 1

The language in the confidential circles is that the constitution of the United States is too complex a system-that it
savours too much of the pernicious doctrine of 'ballances
and checks' that it requires to be simplified in its structure, to
be purged of some monarchical and aristocratic ingredients
which are said to have found their way into it and to be
stripped of some dangerous prerogatives with which it is
pretended to be invested

There are two objects in forming systems of governmentSafety for the people and energy in the administration.
When these two objects are united, the certain tendency of
the system will be to the public welfare. If the latter object be
neglected, the people's security will be as certainly
sacrificed, as by disregarding the former. Good constitutions
are formed upon a comparison of the liberty of the individual with the strength of government: If the tone of either
be too high, the other will be weakened too much.

[The] criterion [of what is constitutional, and what is not so]
is the end, to which the measure relates as a mean. If the end
be clearly comprehended within any of the specified powers, & if the measure have an obvious relation to the end,
and is not forbidden by any particular provision of the constitution-it may safely be deemed to come within the compass of the national authority.32